Do you want me to use it?
Yes, please.
Um, thank you very much, uh, for joining us this morning.
And, uh, we, we look forward to engagement with you to see
how all the progress is, is going and everything.
We, I understand, you know, everybody around the table.
Um, got a couple of new members since last time.
We've got Mike, uh,
Davidson here from the Green Party participating,
and so I'm sure you know, uh, the rest also, whatever the,
um, so, uh, Dave, just to, to begin with, as per usual,
I would ask for some, uh,
introductory comments, uh, from you.
Um, if you could sort of get that within sort of five,
six minutes, that would be great.
And we do have a structure agenda.
You've got visibility over that, hopefully in some way.
So we'll be doing our best to keep in, in that area.
But within the realms, a little bit of flexibility.
We keep the, uh, conversation blowing itself.
So I welcome you and your team that are here today.
And, uh, I will give you the floor
for some open opening comments.
Kia.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I thought I'd start
by just saying last night I read your
briefing on accountability settings
and outcomes for Maori that was released at the end
of last month.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and I'd like to just take a minute
to frame my opening comments around this report.
So in particular, your recommendations number four
and 14 out of this report.
And, um, just a reminder on what those are.
Re four was that the government consider better aligning TP
K's responsibilities under the Maori Development Act 1991
with its strategic contentions.
That was the first, uh, recommendation that referred
to the Maori Development Act.
And the second recommendation, recommendation 14,
that the Maori Affairs Committee consider continuing
to engage with the put equalty on the setting
of its strategic contentions
and alignment with responsibilities
under the Maori Development Act 1991.
And that's in particular, that's with regards
to section five one A and B.
And I just wanted to, as I said, briefly, outline
how these two recommendations have already occurred.
And I thought that was important. Yep.
Because it's a recent report that that, um, clearly
signals we need to align with the Maori Development Act.
And I just wanted to talk about that
because I know this is the year in review
and the year in review.
And in particular, the, the, the, um,
30th of June this year falls smack in the middle
of a transition period between
what was the previous strategic intentions, 2020
to 2024,
and the current strategic contentions
that came into effect on the 1st of July, uh, this year
to 2029.
And there is a difference,
and they relate to your recommendations and your report.
So just by way of explanation, and,
and I know you know this, but I just wanna,
um, outline this.
Um, in 2023 with the change in gov in government, um,
there was a change in direction mandated by cabinet for,
to, uh, to position itself for
strategic influence.
And that was in relation to Maori development
and iwi Maori relations,
including transferring some functions from TI to,
and that occurred late February this year.
So I'm just starting to map out the transition now.
There were five functions that came out of
that direct directive from cabinet.
First of all, the first two were section five one A
and B out of the act.
And reconfirming to pun had to align
with the Maori Development Act, which coincidentally relates
and aligns with your recommendations.
Forum 14. There was a cabinet directive
that came out at the end of 2024,
but the transfers didn't take place until February, 2025.
And then there was the transfer of staff,
et cetera, and the realignment.
So just to remind what those two functions are,
promote increases in the level of Maori achievement
and education, training, employment health
and economic resource development, section five one A,
and secondly, monitoring
and liaising with each department responsible
for the delivery of services to
and for Maori to ensure the adequacy of those services.
That section five one B,
and there are two others, advise the government
and the public service on the distinct rights and interests
and responsibilities of Hapu Iwi Maori.
And that relates to the transfer of functions from ti.
Secondly, lead post settlement relationships
with post settlement governance entities
and monitor the crown's implementation
of treaty settlement commitments that also relates
to the transfer of functions from ti.
And then finally, to support investment
and centered locally government enabled initiatives,
which is the flagship for them is.
So those are five functions.
And this was a, a deliberate change in direction, which
as I say, um, aligns with what came out in your report,
but is not reflected in the annual
report because that was under the previous intentions.
So I thought I'd just outlined.
So what has changed and what has been retained, our vision
of thriving Wana continues that, that that is our, um,
Southern star, if you like.
Our purpose remains the same drawing strength from the past
to build an in New Zealand
where whanau can all stand, thrive and belong.
That's important. That is the, uh, call to arms
for our staff, why they get up in the morning.
Our role has changed.
We were the policy advisor
to the government on Maori wellbeing
and development, the lead policy advisor.
Well now we are that as well as the lead policy advisor
to the government on Iwi
and Maori relations with the crowd.
A further change to our new strategic contentions is,
and you you've been briefed on this, are our two approaches,
the policy approach to total,
and we've covered that previously.
And our delivery approach, whanau centered,
locally led government, and that.
And then we have a sharpened focus.
We've moved from nine focus areas
to five strategic priorities.
And those are in our strategic intent.
And those are w water, Maori economic development
and growth monitoring and mentoring, Maori language
and Culture and Iwi and Maori relationships with the Crown.
Now, some of these priority areas
and the, the strategic alignment resemble
what was in the previous strategic contentions.
But I just wanted to confirm with you that, um,
after reading your report,
and particularly around strong accountability settings,
there is a, a convergence, if you like, about what you saw
and where Cabinet had directed us
and where we have positioned to put it quickly
as reflected in our current strategic contentions,
particularly around your recommendations
to align our strategic contentions with the act.
So we have our functions
and our strategic intentions aligned with our legislation
and cabinet direction.
That's exactly what has occurred, which
I think is more than just the coincidence. Got it,
Got it. Thank you, Dave.
And I think, yeah, I think it's a good,
a good grounding to start this getting a,
a clear understanding of exactly that journey over this, uh,
this last calendar year.
So let's, let's start this, uh, or open this up.
Um, any opening questions with regards
to our first area there is, is organizational,
uh, overview itself.
Thank you, Mr. Chen. Have you, um,
so just explain what you just said in terms
of the role change, please, Dave.
So are you saying now that you always were the advisor
for the government in terms of K Maori,
but have you taken over the responsibility of, um,
of, of, uh, you know, how, um, the, the previous agency,
you know, the, sorry, what was previous?
Have you taken Jan 50 role now? Is that what you're
Saying? Some of those
functions instead?
50 has, um, previous Terra 50 had a number of functions.
Yeah. Um, one was the over overall Maori crown relationship.
The other was treaty settlements,
and the other was, um, Marine
and Coastal Area Act, as well as, um,
the public s lifting the public service capability.
In terms of relations.
Those two functions around the, um, Marine
and coastal area Act
and treaty settlements, they remain with TAR 50.
And if you think back to, uh, previous times
that was similar to what was in OTS, the office
of Treaty settlements, we've taken on the other functions
specifically, what we've been told to do, uh,
to do is advise the government
and the pub public service on the distinct rights, interests
and responsibilities of Iwi,
hapu and Maori.
And then secondly, lead post settlement relationships
with post settlement governance entities
and monitor the crown's implementation
of treaty settlement commitments.
So we've taken on those responsibilities.
It's almost like back to the future.
So you what extra, so
e extra responsibilities, extra staff?
Yes. The, the staff did transfer from, um,
charter 50 44 staff of positions transferred.
Uh, some of those were vacancies, but yes, that is correct.
And what about external consultants?
So is that, uh, set a a, a strategy you're using
or is it just using, using staff?
We, we have a contractor and consultant budget.
It's around, uh, less than 6% of our overall, um,
fund of our departmental fund.
And, um, that it, like all government agencies,
that has been reduced, but we still
use contractors and consultant.
Now. You guys have been taken to court by, well,
the government's been taken to court by,
um, so you are giving advice on that.
You're giving advice on that.
And can you give us indication,
are there any other iwi lining up?
What's the strategy with regards to, with regards to
The, with regards to the policy issues?
And in that case, what we're talking about is the RMA,
and secondly we're talking about the.estate.
Yep. Yeah. So we, we will give policy advice on those
policies, and we do that, um, through the lead agencies.
Now, our advice, um, on that is to those agencies.
So are, are you asking for what that advice is? Yes, yes.
That advice is the responsibility of the lead agencies
to either proactively, um, disclose
or to disclose, um, when asked, not, not from us
as a second opinion advice. I, I
Suppose what I want to know, Dave, is are you, is,
is there any advice to the government that,
that if you continually attacked the treaty,
you will get more of a litigation from Iwi?
I mean, is that type of advice going across?
'cause you know, I think everybody in the room knows that,
uh, j Maori is erupting over the government strategy
with regards to the treaty starts treaty strategy.
Is there any direct advice being given
to the government with regards to that?
There is advice around risks that we would give as part
of our second opinion advice right across
the whole public sector.
Um, the management though of that, the, if perf,
if I'm so bold, would be more aligned
to political advice that we wouldn't give.
I like keeping bold, Dave, we like boldness.
Uh, in terms of, uh, particularly what's happening now
with the this, see, it's, it's like there's a line, right,
that TPK can't go past.
I accept that, but you, you know,
we know what's happening in the education
area. And that at, at
The, the moment. Is that, is that
an area that GPK versus
Yes, it is.
And um, you know, as part of our monitoring function,
we provide monitoring, um, advice
and reports back to education, for example, um,
around, you know, how they are achieving
what they've set out to achieve, particularly as they relate
to the nine targets
and in particular the eight social sector targets.
Mm-hmm. So we do it that way.
And then also through our policy advice, we provide advice
to agencies on what they are taking
through in particular to cabinet.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, one
of the key roles, uh, that's responsibility of
with other agencies is of course the leadership
of the social accords.
With those iwi who do have social accords.
Um, uh, through the past year,
what has been your assessment
of any progress made on those social accords, uh,
and the health of those relationships
through the social accords?
Well, the social accords don't happen in a vacuum.
They happen in a wider context.
And if I just start there, the relationship with Maori
Iwi, hapu is continually evolving.
So it operates in that context,
but the cords, the accords are commitments
and the government is committed to, to
fulfilling those commitments.
They are treaty commitments.
So there will be the, the wider context,
but the Accords, they have all occurred over this last
calendar year except for one.
Um, and that had to do with a timing issue.
Um, and is, are there any particular
progress things you'd like to highlight for the committee
through those accords or just that you've met?
Uh, each of those accords have, um, un
unless they're, they're very new
or they're, they're, their planning cycle has, um, concluded
and they're restarting the planning cycle.
Generally, they'll have a three year strategic plan,
and out of that three year strategic plan,
we'll drop a number of priorities, tier one, tier two,
tier three priorities that they want to achieve,
shared outcomes, if you like, with government.
Um, there would be multiple
that have occurred across the nine accords that we run, the,
um, and the other three accords that, that occur
outside our purview.
So nothing in particular you want like,
Oh, well, okay, give, give Us good story.
Alright,
Good to see you all.
Um, just in terms of the Accords, um,
and some specificity carrying off from Dave's court, it all,
as of the end of October, um, we had 81 actions
that had been agreed across the various accords.
Of those 30 are now complete, 36 are on track
nine, we have made some progress.
Three of those actions are under review,
and three are either on hold, closed,
or we don't have the status for them yet.
So we are very pleased with the progress
that we have made with the Accords.
Um, getting to, um, the 81 agreed actions in, in
and of itself, I think is, um, is, uh, an, uh, indicative
of the successful relationship of continuing that all
between the Crown and, and our partners.
So just finally on that, my mad Mr.
Chair, um, so with the new functions and,
and that you've already spoken to, uh, with your overview
of the organization, the knowledge
that every public department had to make cuts,
significant cuts, I think yours was almost 25 million
by numbers briefly.
Um, that's a pretty good story then given
that there's been added responsibility, less money, we want
to just make sure that the stories that come out of,
and the results that come out of those social accords
actually do happen, continue to progress.
Now people, just a final take on those social accords
and whether or not you see, yes,
there's a treaty obligation there,
but that it is progressing that, you know,
they're not just talkfest,
As I say, it continuously evolves.
Interestingly enough, the Accords didn't transfer
from Tower 50 to us.
They were left with, when it went the other way.
I'm not sure why. Mm-hmm.
Um, we were, we were running the accords, the nine accords
that we've got now since, um, since,
certainly since I arrived in 2019.
But those are always opportunities
and there are opportunities to,
to hit those shared outcomes.
And those may not just be, um, delivery outcomes.
That's where you can discuss policy issues as well
and agree to disagree on those issues.
They're quite important to,
to maintain the enga engagement no matter what is happening,
to maintain that engagement.
So I, I think they are positive, particularly as,
as the relationship evolves.
Mr. Chair, can I, can I just ask, are we following a set?
Well, we're just trying to follow,
we're ruffling the, uh, instruction.
I, I'm happy to, I'm happy to go everywhere.
All good. But,
but you know, you have got a set there thing,
so I just wanna come back then to, to that, uh,
audit findings and the organization overview date.
So we had a 24 point file, whatever it is, what is it?
24.789 million reduction, right?
In terms of baseline funding, is that right?
But your baseline was, was, was, was, um,
reduced by that number.
So has that been, had an adverse effect in terms of
how the organization is running and what you're able to do?
I would, I wouldn't say, um, an adverse effect.
It has focused our mind.
Now, if I think across the whole system, um,
you, you would've seen the various reports from Treasury
and the secretary to the Treasury,
what he has said publicly.
So if I reflect on those, what he's essentially said is
that the public service in its current
configuration is unaffordable.
And that's for a number of reasons.
One has to do with the health costs of rising
age, you know, um, lifespan of, of New Zealand population,
and how that impacts upon pension payments, et cetera.
And the public service is viewed as
unaffordable at this time.
The second point he made was that change, it has to occur,
but it has to occur over a, a, a, an extended period of time
so that we don't have short, sharp, short sharp shock
that we have seen in the past.
And the third is because of these factors, we really do need
to focus on what counts.
Now, the two areas that he highlighted that I think, uh,
there would be general agreement across parliament,
as in health and education.
The others are defense and law and order.
So right across the board, there have been cuts.
What that means for is that when you are faced with that,
what you have to do is focus on your core functions.
The core functions that I've mentioned to you are those,
uh, outlined to you, are those in our act and cabinet.
We cannot afford to do anything else.
We are going to have to focus on those.
And it requires discipline.
So what we've done an answer to your question
is we've made sure we are focused on those and nothing else.
We are not delivering to the extent we used to deliver.
We're still delivering some activity,
but we really do need to focus on those five core functions,
particularly monitoring
and accountability, particularly the treaty relationship,
and particularly the settlement commitments.
Whilst at the same time looking at
how we can offer an alternative view through wau centered,
locally led government enabled investments
to get delivery right.
For Maori through the public service.
So we always talk about, um, connecting, as you remember,
the treaty, um, outputs with that, right?
That was, that was some of the, that we talked about,
particularly that settlement about
how do we connect the settlement
to what's happening day to day.
That's, that is a complaint from our people is
that they get a treaty settlement
and then they've gotta use that for day to day things.
Right. And so I, I wanna know now in terms of
that we settlement, where are we, Dave?
Are we, uh, are we making any progress
with Penny's relations or the story?
I can't, I can't really comment on that.
'cause it's Tara's role to lead the settlement.
Not Tara, sorry, to the new organization.
They still run treaty settlements.
Right, right.
So it moves to today post settlement, if that's it. Okay.
Yeah. What do you want to tell us about?
Think I pass the question to Candy.
He, I got that up update.
Haven't got enough time this morning with Kara. Great.
Um, um, seeing as the conversation's turned dead,
can you speak to us how the, uh,
what's it been eight months now in terms
of managing, um, the Haya?
How's that, how's that been?
Um, what have been the, um,
what have been the, the struggles?
What have been the, uh, where, where do you, uh, what, what,
what are, what are your hopes, um,
for these next, uh, 12 months?
Well, shortly, I'll hand over to my crew,
but, um, if I reflect on when we spoke about the Auditor
General's report mm-hmm.
We came before select committee to talk about that.
And I did say to you that, look, this doesn't,
this doesn't bode well in terms
of the Auditor General's report.
Mm. What we do know is, um, nearly, it's nearly a year later
that there has been, uh,
an increase in those commitments being met.
Okay. Around 6%. And I didn't expect that.
So, so that, you know, as you might recall, yeah.
At the time when the auditor to General Report came out,
that was right when we were having the, um,
functions transferred to 20 quarter.
That really worried me.
But what we are seeing is an increase in those settle
commitments being delivered, that
Would be a positive outcome of the shift of, uh,
of the responsibility of those commitments to TPK.
Well, you, you could say that, I'm not sure if I can say
that I would say that,
but, um, I'm not sure if I can claim that.
I mean, um, that could be for a number of things.
No, to Fifi. Sorry.
No, to Fifi. Yeah. So, um, so
I'll just hand over to, to explain more, uh, the team
to explain more about, um, your question.
Thanks, Steve. Um, we came
and spoke to you early on in the year,
and we, um, at
that time we spoke about the whole system report mm-hmm.
And part two of the whole system report, um,
that is currently going through cabinet,
and we're hoping that we'll be made publicly available on
the 15th of the week of the 15th of December.
Oh. Um, in terms of what that report says,
there's essentially three, um, areas
where we've seen improvements.
PSG views have been incorporated into the report.
So we had a subsection of, uh, pgs whom we engaged with.
Um, agency's insights have been sharpened again,
and we've made, um,
we've acted on further on the Auditor
General's recommendations.
The highlight there, as Dave's pointed to,
is agencies are making progress with 83.3%
of commitments assessed as being, um,
either completed or on track.
And that's an increase from 76.7% in 2024.
Um, so I would say that we are,
we are progressing quite well.
Mm. The shift here this time has been, um, active engagement
with each of the agencies as well as, um,
although a small subset in the beginning, our PSGs as well,
to get a richer story to HI is just a platform.
Um, but how we use that, uh, we, we've started
to invest a little bit more into te Hi to, to ensure
that we're getting the right analytical data out of it,
and that the usability from a agency perspective, um,
is, is being improved.
Um, but we're also creating space for PSGs
to use TE I as well.
So we are getting that dual view
and, um, not just a public sector
or agency view of the data.
So that's been the highlight
of the improvement connected to the whole system as
Well. So there, that's, that's
a good news story.
And it comes potentially at a bit
of a surprise, the shift there.
What are our learnings as to why
that shift has actually occurred?
I mean, I think the thing I would add is
that we've had a really, a laser focus on engaging
and influencing with the agencies with the top four,
a number of commitments, both the, the number
and also the number of delivery issues.
So we are focused some of our engagements
and, um, efforts around there,
seeking from them the information about
what their plans are, what they're doing,
how are settlements, um, commitments, monitoring
and management being handled within their agencies.
And that's seeing some really good improvements. We think.
Um, the other point that, um, ENA made was around some
of the improvements through te
and key to that is the ability for our PSGs to validate.
We've talked about this before, um, to validate
what agencies are actually staying so
agencies can update their status.
We are on track, we are complete,
but what are PSGs views of that?
So we've got a, a dual approach to that
where we've got our regional engaging with PSGs out there,
but also in the system of deta itself,
we are building functionality to make sure
that they can say yes or no. We agree,
Disagree. So with
the, uh, number of PSGs that are in,
in position right now, are all, do all of them have access
to provide feedback
or is he just a, have you just been the first time they've
had the opportunity to come to deta?
Have you got a smaller group? What they've
Always had access to see this?
Um, but this extra functionality is in its sort
of final testing stages now.
They need to actually be able to go in
and activate and validate.
They've always had visibility.
Okay. I think, um, it's probably be good
to get some ground truths on this.
So maybe one of the regional directors can come forward
to talk about that engagement with PSGs.
But what I would say is there's, there's that end,
but also what the team, um,
how the team structured this was, um, first of all,
the minister wrote to colleague ministers
about the commitments, right?
I wrote to those chief executives that have commitments.
Um, the deputy secretaries then engaged with them,
and I engaged with Chief executives, those
that were at the top end, like Lynns, about
how we could achieve those commitments
and go faster, if you like.
Um, and, and get to the, the end
of those specific commitments.
So there's a whole structured approach,
and it was around the influence, so around influence
as opposed to authority.
But anyway, George can talk about, um, engagement
with actual people out there,
The regional director for the could could order region.
So explain down to Cape.
Uh, we've got 12 p this region, oh, PSGs, um, across our,
um, so we've had a, uh, set out a program to, um, engage
with all of those 12 PSGs over the, the financial year.
Uh, we've engaged with about five so far.
Um, and they've really welcomed the opportunity
to have a conversation around treaty commitment.
Some of them had settled more than 10 years ago.
So, um, a lot of the feedback is they've, they've kind
of satisfied with how the settlement's been progressing,
but then there are a number of commitments
that they have highlighted that, um, they, they're keen
for us to kind of work with other agencies
to get things moving along a bit quicker.
But, um, it's the first time they've had that opportunity to
actually have that level of engagement.
So, um, and my team have really enjoyed going out
and engaging with the PSGs, um, and the space.
'cause it's, uh, something
that we obviously hadn't been doing.
So it's a new function that we've taken on
board, uh, this year.
And the, the staff have really enjoyed the
engagement with PSGs.
So lot, lots of, um, uh, good feedback,
but there's also some, uh,
some opportunities for improvement.
Uh, what can you tell us about that?
That the opportunities for improvement?
Where are there particular areas, uh, within the government
that we potentially need have some, an increased focus,
increased encouragement?
So obviously it varies across the PSGs
and it varies with the level
of relationship they have with those agencies.
Some PSGs will have a really good relationship
with an agency and others may not have that same level
of relationship with that same agency.
So it's just, um, getting a handle on that
and then working through that process around
how do we help help them improve that engagement.
So relationships is, uh, being present. Can we, and yes.
Cups of tea. So are some agencies perhaps struggling
to find the time to perhaps, uh, invest in that type
of engagement to, to form the relationship?
Is that where we're, we're we're weak in some areas?
Um, possibly, yeah.
But that, that could, that could be the case.
Um, as part of our functionality now, we, we,
we are in their boots and all, so,
so we are able to go and, and engage.
We, we, we have a good relationship
with those other agencies.
We will reach out to them and see whether
or not they want to join us when
we have those conversations.
But, um, yeah, part to say how they sit, um,
across the other agencies in terms
of their ability to engage,
Obviously plays a very important PA part in the
relationship and the regents that on the, at that.
But, uh, we don't want agencies to think that that's right.
That's, you, you, you're taking care of it.
It's, we need to ensure
that they're also there participating Yes. In that
Well, they're, they're responsible, right.
And I don't take their responsibility or their risk. Mm-hmm.
Um, so, you know, when we think about it,
this is quite a big operation.
We're talking about 14,000
seven hundred and fifty fifty one commitments.
And of those, you know, looking at the percentages,
57.8 are complete, 25.5% are on track,
3.5% have delivery issues,
and 13.2% have yet to be triggered.
But it just shows you the scale.
It's not going to be one thing there, there has
to be a whole of system approach to this.
Mm-hmm. And within 10 pointing quarterly, which is,
you know, this is an example.
You have your regions as well as the head office, you know,
working on this and working
with the agencies, it's quite a big ask.
I'm surprised that the dial moved so quickly. Mm.
Um, I'm not exactly sure why you're very good at your work.
Yeah. But with that, there's also, um, how,
how do we now work with the auditor general?
'cause remember that that triggered some of this.
So I might get Steve Good about that.
Good. Dave and I, I might, um, invite, um,
our general manager for settlement,
Jane Fletcher, um, as well.
Um, what we're talking about in respect of
TETA sits in a broader framework, um, as cabinet, um,
in 2022, the ana, uh, framework of,
of settlement commitments.
Um, so what TE represents is probably the most prominent
and, uh, data rich part of it.
Um, but you know, the overall framework is, um,
a four stage approach to, um, that,
that 20 as a system leader, uh, owns the framework,
and then the agencies
who have commitments own their commitments
and must implement them.
Mm. And where comes into that picture is, um,
when there are settlement delivery issues.
Um, and that can be both agencies coming to us,
as you've heard through the, um, examples just now.
And that also, um, proactive, uh, approach we've taken, um,
since the transfer of functions in February, uh, plus also,
um, pgs coming into the system.
Um, in April, the order General, um, shortly
after, um, the transfer of functions, uh,
released a report into
how public agencies were upholding their
treaty settlement commitments.
Um, and that was a very timely, uh, report for us
because, you know, coincided, uh, almost immediately with
that transfer and set a baseline for what needed to happen.
Um, since then, obviously we've heard about our main focus,
which has been, um, the, the literal, uh, improvements
and changes to Tata, but over the next year, um,
and Jane, I hope you don't mind if, um, you, um, want to,
um, provide some detail here over the next year.
It's about, um, also what we can do
with other agencies here in Wellington, um, as we look at
that overall head framework
and what we can do to help guide agencies
to lift their performance as well,
Uh, Morina.
Um, so as Steven said, ANA provides the framework
through which of the Crown manages its
treaty settlement commitments.
It includes to, you know, the expectation
that agencies report on the status of their commitments.
It also includes guidance
and tools, um, to support settlement delivery.
It requires to do its system-wide report
that you've just heard about.
And it also establishes an issue resolution process for
PSGs and the Crown.
So our focus this year has been on to,
and working with agencies
to ensure they're entering their commitments
and focused on their commitments.
Next year, we're going to move through as recommended
by the auditor General to think about the holistic
relationship, um, uh, agreed through treaty settlements
and to focus on that guidance to public organizations
to ensure that they are thinking about the relationship
management aspects of the chairs mentioned as well.
You know, having that cup of tea, um,
to support them to do that.
Um, we, the other aspect is there are a number of, um,
significant settlement issues.
So our role is to help resolve those
significant settlement issues are defined under ana, um,
as having one of several factors, for example, a breach
of the settlement deed
or, um, an issue that requires crown wide input.
There are six settlement issues that, um,
we received when we received the function.
We've now got that down to four.
That doesn't mean others won't rise in future
of, of course they will.
But, um, that's the kind of progress
that we are tracking in this area. Yeah.
Supplement supplementary, just outta curiosity, um,
after the report was released by the office
of the Auditor General, um, I know that there's a lot
of mahi being done in preparation for the, the,
the coming months and years,
but did you find that organizations volunteered
to say, um, Hey, let's get together and have a put it or,
or something as a result of that?
Yeah. Um, immediately, um,
at least one chief executive contacted me to talk about
how that could be done better
and how we could facilitate that better.
That was from Lynn. Okay.
And that's very much in that, um, if I may, Dave, the,
the guidance, um, function we provide
to our colleagues across the public service, um,
as Dave said, not owning their commitments,
but guiding their way through those shows.
I just say that's, that's a success if they're coming
to you, Dave, rather having
to knock on their door. 'cause Yeah. That's good.
If you don't mind, um, colleagues, if I can ask a kind
of supplementary to this
and earlier conversations about the change of roles.
Mm-hmm. Um, with respect to the, the,
the refreshed strategic intentions.
Um, how, how did that fall into the, um,
new responsibilities?
How was, how did, um, how have you found, uh,
aligning those new strategic contentions
with the new responsibilities?
Um, how has that played out?
Um, as I mentioned earlier, the, um,
the new strategic contentions has,
and also aligned, I think with our resources
has focused our attention.
We've gone from nine to five to five priorities,
and one of those has to do with
settlements and the relationship.
So, um, it's, it's been quite focused.
Um, it's a key, a key issue.
So there was a number of things that drove this.
One was the auditor general's report.
The, you know, the other was a collective commitment
from both ministers, the government
and public servants,
that we should uphold those commitments.
So there's that drive then.
And to be fair, there were tools
there that came across.
Um, so we didn't just start afresh,
we didn't just start new, we just really focused
on it and made sure it was intentionally put into our
strategic contentions, and then we developed the capability
around that in terms of our reorganization. Steve.
Yeah. Thank you Dave.
And that, as Dave has just said, um, in respect
of our reorganization this year, know what we did, um,
when the functions transferred on the 24th, February, 2025,
is think about, well, where do these fit within,
uh, a broader, um, ministry that exists already 20 ly,
um, not to, uh, not putting the negative,
but to replicate a, a silo within.
So you've heard, for instance, just
before from George Mackey as a regional director.
Well, you know, there's a 15 office regional presence
that when corporate he brings across the model.
So we'd of course want to leverage off that, um, as part of
how we structure the, um, functions that we have.
So what we've done quite recently is have a sort of,
if you will, second look, um, since the transfer
of functions and the one, uh, with a particularly pilot,
there is, um, what Jane has been talking about,
which is the post settlement, uh, commitments work,
and where we think about that within the ministry
and giving that, uh, more prominence
and indeed, um, um, in some ways more resources as well.
Um, so the reorganization we're talking about,
um, is both what transferred, but also where it sits
and how I could put it this way is almost we achieve, um,
we achieve, um, um,
efficiencies, um, from
what already exists within 24.
Um, so, you know, coming back to that,
if you are talking about PSG engagement,
of course the best mechanism is for that to go
through regional directors and the regional presence
because they have existing relationships.
Um, so why try
and, um, re replicate a channel of communication there,
um, as an example. Um,
Oh, and in terms of processes,
Yeah, in terms of process, I just also wanted
to add around agencies.
Um, we have seen an uplift in what they've reported in terms
of detail on treaty settlements and their annual reports.
Um, so that has improved significantly over the past year,
and that's allowed more thorough analysis, um,
which has included in the whole system report
and enables our role as system monitors
for treaty settlements, um, to be more transparent.
Um, it's also another way where agencies are showing
that they are accountable for the delivery
of treaty settlements and keeps our role firm
as the monitors for treaty settlements.
How did you achieve that, uh, advancements
and the amount of information they put into you?
Was that, was that instigated in a
discussion between you and them?
Or did they proactively actually see the
value in putting more in there? How, how was that achieved?
Um, in a number of ways.
Um, there's, um, some improved guidance from treasury
around financial, um, reporting.
Yep. Um, we've also obviously have talked about the
engagements that we've had, um, with the agencies
and obviously, uh, going to be having, um, improvements
and review of the guidance material that we do provide
around, um, how agencies report on treaty
settlements in a transparent way.
Okay. The, um, the 360 nature of te what I mean
by back from the agencies through to the
PGS on the other side, are you seeing any, uh, great dispar
between what ESG is
and saying compared to what the agencies are saying?
Um, I can talk to that one.
Um, through the whole system report analysis,
we have also found that e sgs, um,
have a mixed response to delivery progress.
So it doesn't, isn't always consistent with
what agencies are reporting.
Um, largely that's a conversation that needs to happen
to resolve those issues.
And the, um, the increased reporting functionality from Tera
is allowing those issues to be, to surfaced
and then resolved through relational, um, conversations
through the PSG and the relevant agency.
Good.
Yes. William, The tribunal, uh,
been interesting, isn't it?
Tribunal the government's approach, uh, to the tribunal.
Uh, first of all, how, um, in terms
of the whole treaty settlement process, as we all know,
the tribunal's views, uh, free important.
So what I'm interested in is your type of,
the advice you're given to the government with regards
to the tribunal date.
What, where are we with that?
Uh, also in terms
of the independent technical advisory group, um,
how much can, Is appropriate to ask how much being spent on
that independent, uh, group?
It's been established, you know,
that's been doing the review, but even more important is,
you know, what type of advice has been given
to the government with regards to this, uh,
and, uh, uh,
and given that the government seems to be a bit sorted
with the role of the tribunal,
'cause that's the right description,
Bernard's looking a lot older now.
I haven't seen him for a while. Thank you for that.
You've gotta stop before that. He more, more
you're a bureaucratic,
distinguished, I you find the right.
Anyway, where are we? Okay, I just hand over
to Paula in terms of the review.
Um, so in 2025, earlier this year, cabinet agreed to, uh,
progress with a review of the, uh, treaty
of Wang Act 1975,
and principally to explore
how the Yang Tribunal legislation could be amended
to ensure the, uh, the origin went back
to its original intent and it was kept.
Um, we, our role in, uh, supporting that was to, uh, it was
as a secretariat, uh, for, um, for that work.
The review established, uh,
and independent technical advisory group
that has been overseen by a ministerial advisory group.
And it's been led by the Minister for Maori Development.
Um, it was completed,
the review itself was completed in September, uh,
and it has yielded 24 recommendations.
Um, the report itself from the independent technical
advisory group hasn't been, uh, publicly released
because the policy
is currently, sorry, what was that, Paula?
Sorry. It hasn't been publicly released
because it's currently under active consideration
and we've been providing sort of thought was completed.
It went to the Minister of Advisory Group
and now Tiffany's role, um, is providing policy support
to the, to the Minister of Advisory Group, just to consider
what legislative options are available
to the government now.
Um, and what we've tried to do is make sure that, um,
perspectives on both from the, um, well,
from across the Crown, from justice, from Crown Law, um,
and from ourselves have been able to influence
that particular set of policy advice
that's now with the government.
Ben, did you wanna add anything?
Uh, simply to say that the nature of the advice, um,
that we are providing
to the ministerial advisory group is really focused on
how we might improve, um, the support
and, um, delivery of, um, uh, treaty settlements, um,
right across the board.
So how that they, they support, uh, iwi and Maori, uh, Hawi
and Maori aspirations moving forward.
So can I ask you, were you all aware of the type
of criticism the tribunal has been getting from senior,
very senior ministers?
Um, so is there a view that TPK gives
or are you asked for your view on that in terms of how, um,
uh, upsetting that is to, to, to iwi groups?
Or is there any sort of perspective that you give, uh,
in terms of how important the, the role that,
that the tribunal has played in previous years
and continues to play, given that I think Maori are worried
that the tribunal's going to be dismantled?
Mm-hmm. Yes.
We have provided advice, um, to affirm the importance
of the Wang Tribunal within the context of, um,
the government and, uh, the executive, uh,
and, uh, iwi Maori.
Um, so the nature of our advice, as Burn has said,
has been anchored in, um, te um,
our OB informed by observations also
by the WA tribunal itself.
Um, because earlier this year, the Wang Tribunal
provided their own 20 year strategic plan.
And so, as you know, which itself, uh, talked
to particular aspects that, you know, it could see,
could be quite helpful in terms
of modernization of the tribunal.
So what we've looked to is provide balance advice that's,
that looks to bring some of the views
of the tribunal forward, the land,
the Maori Land Court itself, um, as well,
because there's obviously resourcing applications become
with regards to the Maori Land court
and the relationship it has with the WA Tribunal.
Um, in addition to the, uh, the perspectives
that we've been able to gauge from Iwi Maori across Tu
Be, be important to add
that the independent technical advisory group between, uh,
may and June conducted a series of, uh, hu
and, uh,
they were targeted given the timeframes that they had.
Um, but, um, the, and both in person
and obviously online, um, there was, uh, a range
of individuals who would discuss, uh, who we talked to
as well, about 164 of those.
And the National Iwi Chairs Forum, um, was a part of that,
that, um, engagement as well.
And that resulted in about 45 individual written pieces
of feedback that were all incorporated
in some way, shape, or form
To the final report. So
you would be aware, Bernard, uh, and, uh, um, Dave
and all of that, the breaches of the treaty, uh, in terms
of, um, what's been happening is
now actually United Nations.
Right. So we've had Lady two Moxon over there in the last
couple of weeks, uh,
and she was talking about, uh, talking about elimination
of racial discrimination.
She, she, so she put that complaint up
and she says the complaint raises concern about the review
of the WA tribunals governing legislation.
She said to the un,
the government has escalated discrimination against Maori.
Any, any views given to the government On, on, on that, um,
on that, on the comments, sorry, late the two said
that the gov to the United Nations,
that this government has escalated
discrimination against Maori.
Was there any advice given No. Around that? No.
No. We, we didn't give advice on, on the
What about, about, in terms of what she said about, uh,
the two laws passed in the past fortnight,
the regulatory standards filled, and the education
and training amendment bill, which removes obligations
to schools to give effect to the treaty of,
what was the advice around that?
We have provided advice on, um, those
policies, but those advice, that advice goes directly
to the those that are leading.
Yes. The advice, um, we, we can't disclose that mm-hmm.
Can't disclose that advice.
No. Um, but those agencies, if they decide
to proactively disclose those, that that cabinet,
those cabinet decisions or those papers, shall,
We guess, shall we guess that the type
of advice you gave, we can all have a
No, that, that's not right though,
because our advice has been, um,
disclosed in the past if we think about,
But, but this one, No.
Um, but just advice that, um, could be
considered controversial
that has been disclosed in the past, if you think about, um,
seven AA for example.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Um, so we, we find ourselves
constantly having our advice disclosed,
and I don't have a problem with that.
But what I would just say about the Waitangi Tribunal, it's,
um, and, and I know you, you referred to this correctly,
it's a review of the act.
Yeah. It's not a review of the tribunal.
And where are we with that now, Dave?
Sorry, is it going back to the, goes back to,
to the minister and then he has to go back to his group?
Does it, it is with the ministerial advisory group right
now for consideration.
I was just gonna say, to add, to add today,
what I would say with any advice that we provide, um,
whether it's primary advice
or in our secondary advice capacity, um, it is,
it follows the guidance that we talked, came, talked
to the committee about, uh, earlier this year to, to Hill,
which we've been really clear to, to is a treaty based.
It's a, it's, it's anchored in.
And so the advice that we provide, we look to ensure, um,
we are bringing that to the table.
Um, and we can have that informed by evidence through our,
the regional insights from our, from our regional teams
around what they're seeing
and experiencing, um, as well as, uh, through the, the work
that we do here in national office.
So we can be really clear that that provides the guidance
for which we will, which we will advise the government.
Okay. Any other questions around that?
I'm quite happy to continue. I'm quite happy.
Can I just, if it's on that? Yeah. Okay.
Because we are talking about advice given
and given that the, the, uh,
government was advised particularly on the regulatory
standards, but, uh, that there was a, um, a breach
of treaty rights.
I, I suppose what I'm trying to say is, now what impact does
that have in terms of you rolling out your treaty, uh,
program and your treat your treaty strategy
when a government has said, uh, you know, we, we hear
what you're saying, but we're continuing
with this regulation, but
The, um, within government,
government policy is to uphold
treaty settlement commitments.
Yeah. Um, so, um, we are the ministry
for Maori Development that's in our legislation.
Um, we provide free
and frank advice that doesn't change regardless of
who, who the government is.
We continue to provide that advice.
Does it affect the whole program though, Dave, in terms
Of, it doesn't affect the
Way, 'cause you've got a government that's ignored,
not just advice from you, but from their own agency.
Any government has the right to govern how they decide.
We, we, we provide advice.
We continue to provide advice in accordance
with our legislative responsibilities and cabinet direction.
Um, that's our area of operation,
but we also have to influence those other agencies,
hence the advice that Paula
and the team fearlessly provide to those agencies
in our second opinion policy advice.
Hence the monitoring that is done by Tarina and her team
and Grace and her team out in the regions
to hold people to account.
So we haven't changed,
but the system still allows for us to do our job.
This is the importance of the framework.
Uh, we've been working to implement that as the,
this committee will understand
through the various representations we've made.
Uh, and we've been working with a number of, uh, agencies
to pilot the implementation process, um, including
as an example, the Ministry for Regulation, uh, where we've,
uh, met with all of their staff
and some of their senior executives too, to, um, work them
through how it is, um,
that they could potentially implement this as part
of their advice giving.
What impact is supplementary to Willie?
What impact then, if any,
is there on TBK if ministers, cabinet ministers
or governments do not take the advice of TBK given, what,
how does that impact the operations
in the mahi that TBK does?
That, that happens all the time.
I mean, it has happened my whole time in the public service.
I've worked with ministers who don't,
and they don't need to take our advice.
Um, we give that advice freely,
and it's appropriate if a minister says, well, I'm not,
you know, thank you for your advice, but I disagree
and I want to do this, then I would explain to that minister
how I would implement that.
Yeah. That's
Must be near impossible though,
if the minister doesn't agree with anything with regards,
so I'm to the treaty, right.
So if they, if they don't agree with basis
and in terms of partnership,
must make it nearly impossible though.
Yes. I, I have in struck, I have in
Given be given new functions, the transfer
of the functions.
K Is that a foresight for TPK at this point
that you will have a lot more work to do with PSG, uh, GEs
or Iwi and Maori when the decisions
or the advice given by TPK the capital of government
isn't the same as what TPK gives?
How does that impact the people you work with, including,
As I say, that the relationship evolves, um, over time.
You know, it's been 185 years of evolution
and it has its peaks and troughs
and we just continue to, to steward through that.
That's our function we steward through this, um,
the peaks and the troughs.
And it's not, um, it can't be described one dimensionally
that it's all bad or all good,
and we just have to steward through it. Raymond,
Uh, coming back to the real world, um, Mr.
Samuels, so with respect, what I'm hearing from you
and your, your very hardworking team is that, um, since
that shift from, um, from TE 50 to the responsibilities, um,
some responsibilities going to TPK
and that, that kind of focus you spoke about earlier,
and also a couple of you spoke about how, um, the, the,
the good news stories, the efficiencies, would you say
that the shift, and I know it was all kind of, um,
a bit obscure when it first happened.
Um, would you say that there's definitely been some
positivity in that, um,
shift those roles going into TPK?
Because from what I'm hearing, it sounds like there has been
that focus on, um, you know,
following treaty settlements, things like that.
I'm seeing some nods behind you,
But of course, um, uh, look, uh, I, I would say
that, um, we have grasped the, um,
the opportunity here.
I take very seriously directions that come out of cabinet
and we've aligned ourselves to do
what we've been told to do.
Um, so in that sense, um,
it's been positive, sorry,
Against all odds,
Well, against being cut back $25 million. Yeah. I suppose
Against some people making that you can't achieve it
$25 million down. Of course, you,
Well, they're proving themselves
Such on, well, well please, they just keep, can we allow,
can we allow, can we allow Dave to answer the question,
take another 25 off.
So, um, I'm proud of the organization.
Um, we've been told to, to, um,
realign the government's direction that's reflected in our
strategic documents that this team here developed to align
with that, and we are doing it.
Yeah. And I'm very grateful for, um, for your tenacity
and for the positive, um, impact that,
that these changes are having through your hard work.
Thank you. I do have a new line
of question if no one else has any,
any supplementaries around that event.
Yep. Alright. Okay.
Um, just I realized we didn't, um,
touch too much on performance reporting and, um,
and ever since I was blessed to become a member
of Parliament, I know that this is something
that comes up a lot, performance reporting
and how we, um, aligning what we are spending to,
um, to achieve this.
So if you can please, um, just, um,
give us an update if you don't mind, on, on how are the,
the, um, financial decisions
and resource allocations, um, being directly linked
to the refreshed, uh, strategic intentions
and government priorities.
So yeah, how are we going with that?
Linking off what we are spending with the intentions
and the priorities of the government piece?
Okay. If I just start with an overview,
and it's the year in review, so I'll, um, refer to the
previous financial year.
So the overall vote, 557 million in total.
Now of that 14% is departmental. Yeah.
So that's $79 million
and non-departmental going out to other organizations
or to the community that was 477 million
or 86% of the total spend of
that non-departmental, uh, 120 million
or 25% was invested directly into the community,
including 67 million into our housing.
And then 169 million or 36% was invested into Crown
or statutory entities.
Like, um, for example, the agencies that we pass money to,
to Manga pa or to toda, et cetera,
um, Maori.
Um, and then a further 187 million
or 39% through to ana water.
So that's where our funding has gone.
And in terms of the cuts, there were some, um,
reductions in non-departmental,
but the majority of what we were saving came out
of departmental in terms of percentages Yeah.
Of that spend. So, Taina, did you want
to speak further on that? Just
In terms of the specific question you asked
around our outcomes when we spoke, um, with you last time,
we talked about the refresh of our
strategic outcome measures.
Um, and so we're, we are currently, um, undergoing
that shift, the feedback that we've received, um,
specifically was around, um, ensuring we had a mix of short
and longer term outcomes.
So to, to that question, yes.
Workers underway,
and we'll be reporting on that our next senior report
and your outcome measures
On on your next year. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
How are we going team? We about exhausted
our questions in these areas.
What are we up to? Also, we're probably in
that first box just price for break,
additional
the next block that could be, uh, a little bit chunky.
If, uh, if we're exhaust of those questions,
we might just take a short break now
before get into the next phase.
Okay. So, uh, the time now is just about 10.
So convene at, uh, 10 25.
Thank you.
25. Um, so we're moving on to the, the part
of the agenda just that's, uh, worded after a break there.
Equitable and effective public sector performance for Maori.
So let's kick straight into it. Penny,
Um, a couple of big decisions made in the last year
with respect to AU Water, uh,
and the commissioning agencies.
I wondered if you wouldn't mind giving us just some open
introductory remarks on that.
We have a number of questions,
not just about the commissioning agencies,
but of course the delivery for fau.
Sure. Mr. Chair.
Um, so if I reflect on whanau water
and many around the room have been on the journey
as Wau Water has evolved over the last decade.
Plus, what I have seen is
the chief executive responsible
for Wau water over the years,
it can be summarized as follows.
First of all, this is a flagship example of wau centered,
locally led government enabled delivery.
And that's really important
because from my experience, I know
that the public service cannot deliver to all Maori, right.
There's a lot of reasons for that.
I've discussed that with select committee before.
But the highlight, the, the points I'd like to highlight are
that first of all, there's a trust and confidence issue.
And that's because of 185 years of history.
Amongst other things,
the public service cannot reach our wau.
Some of that has to do with trust and confidence.
It may be a geographical issue,
but Wau Water has reached,
the second point I'd make is around attribution.
We saw through the emergencies
over the last six years, whether
that was COVID, whether that was, um,
environmental emergencies, whether emergencies, um,
what we saw there was W Water being able to deliver
to those communities.
Yeah. And we could count it.
'cause often they were outputs like injections.
We could count that.
Or how many people were supported
to get their houses repaired or whatever that may be.
But they were outputs.
So there was the reach and the ability to deliver.
But the third point I'd make when I would go
to my colleagues and suggest that we use Whanau Water
to deliver as a public service delivery system,
the point that would be made to me was that, yeah,
but Dave, you can't prove it.
Now, only my subjective view,
but I inherently know that works
as many in this room would believe.
But that always flummoxed me that I couldn't prove it.
So the fundamentals of Whanau water, the seven outcomes,
as we now move into the, the new, uh,
w water commissioning agencies remain in place,
but the key point is they can reach where we can't reach.
And the second point under the New W Water model is
that we are aligning it with the social investment approach
and using IDI so that we can prove it.
Now, if we can prove it, then I expect it to be funded.
The funding for AU Water has not shifted
in, in any, um,
significant way since I've been the chief executive.
But at the moment, it is ahead of the game.
The, um, task we were given was
to position whanau order as a public service
delivery model that compliments social investment.
And that goes to attribution.
The data going in there, we will be able to prove it.
So when I'm asked, or when I asked,
why don't you use Whanau water?
And someone says to me, well, you can't prove it.
My first answer will be, well, neither can you
in your delivery of your systems.
And we can't across the public sector to any great scale.
Wau Water is the biggest program that is aligned
to the IDI.
This is ahead of the game, positioning it for the future.
And the second point I'd make, yeah, I can prove it.
So that's where we are with.
So if I may, Mr.
Chair, um, it's accepted
and it has been since the beginning of Wau Water,
that there's cost associated with the establishment and,
and, and, and your infrastructure to continue
to deliver such a good model.
Seeing that change to from three to now four different,
uh, fighters, are we, uh, are you able
to give us any confidence
and assurance that money is going to whanau need
and not infrastructure development or,
or, you know, growing the office instead of, you know,
supporting the community
and whanau need, I accept your organization.
There might be a, there's a balance there looking
for a reassurance that's in this short time
that they've been in operation, you are seeing
that our wau aren't missing out
and that money isn't being soaked up
into agency, if you will.
Yeah, and, and that's a good question.
I think based on learnings from the past, the,
the funding model for W Water pushes the
funding to the front.
And so you, you can't, you can't build,
um, a, a huge infrastructure at the back,
and that's based around the navigators.
So there's $150,000 that is allocated per navigator.
125 of that goes to the front.
And that's for, for workforce development training
and for the navigator function
and the provider function, only 25,000 of
that can stay at the back.
That, that's important. Yeah.
And that, you know, there's, and,
and that, that was, um, you know, quite difficult
to figure out how are we going to do this
with the people in need Right at the front whanau,
because at the center,
and we don't spend this on a whole infrastructure
development exercise at the back,
but I'll just hand over to Grace
because there are three elements of
that funding I've just talked about, um,
the navigators at the front
and the providers, the Whanau Water Commissioning Agency,
but there's also Whanau Direct Yeah.
As well. Great,
Thanks. Um,
so just building on, from what Dave has said, one of the
key challenges we had with AU order, the old version, was
that we didn't have a funding model.
So it was a bulk funding approach.
And so there wasn't a, um, a clear allocation of
how much should be spent on frontline navigators,
how much should be spent on, on AU and,
and, um, AU director, other initiatives,
and how much should be spent on, uh, back office functions.
So the, the lack of clarity across those meant that, um,
we were never really clear what, uh,
where the funding was going in terms of
that frontline service delivery
and making sure that wau as the ultimate recipients
of Wau order we're getting at the funding
that they required.
We've tried to, um, build on the strengths of Wau order 1.0,
we call it that, and retain the characteristics
that we know work for whanau,
but at the same time bringing a higher level of, uh,
of, um, uh, integrity, I guess in terms
of the funding model, so that it's clear not just, uh,
from a government perspective, but for all the providers
and for the commissioning agencies.
How does the money get distributed across the country?
How does it get distributed within each of the four regions
and making sure that the communities
where funding is needed most, uh, receive that funding.
We have retained in the funding model the important
characteristic of, uh, uh, flexible funding, uh,
called Whanau Direct in the previous model called Whanau,
other initiatives in this model, which enables the navigator
to work with the wau
and building off their plan, work out
where funding might need to be applied.
So that's still a key characteristic of this model.
Just quickly, if I may, Mr.
Chair, so the Wau order framework is sent to us by ana.
That's, uh, I take, if I heard you right, that hasn't
Changed? That's correct.
That's still a very strong component in the contract.
So the contract is based on outcomes
and the seven whanau, um,
order outcomes are still the foundation of the contract.
Thank you, Willie. Alright, so the previous provider,
as far as I remember, had, uh,
was probably audited more than any other provider
that I've ever seen in my life.
You are saying it was a lack
of clarity from the previous provider.
So there was, um, you can be audited
and you can have audited accounts,
but the contract that we had
with Wana order 1.0 did not require a funding model
to give transparency to
how many navigators would be employed
and how much of that funding would be at the front line.
So that wasn't, that the provider wasn't providing that,
it was that the contract didn't require it.
I, I just wanna come to what you're saying
'cause it's, you know, we all know this is a controversial
area and I've questioned the minister on this before
and so on to question you.
Um, so because,
because it has been, um, a, a big question of, and,
and a question a lot of angst in ma Maori communities
because of, uh, the decision
to take away the contract from the previous provider.
So I just want to, you've said two things.
Lack of clarity, lack of integrity in terms
of the previous provider. You stand by those comments.
It's not integrity with the provider.
As I said, the contract that we held to pun
did not require the provider in this instance,
the commissioning agencies to provide that level of detail.
So it wasn't a contractual requirement.
Now that's a contract that we designed.
It's a contract that we entered into going forward
with the new contract.
We have changed that c
Can I, can I just make a point that's not specific
to one commissioning agency?
That was for all commissioning agencies?
No, this wasn't directed specifically to one commissioning
Agency. Well, I hear that, but
the problem we have, Dave, is that,
that the, um, the, the rumor that went around Wellington,
as you well know, was
that the minister intervened on the process.
So I want want, and I think I've asked this question
before of years, and I'm mm-hmm.
I wanna do it again though, Mr.
Chair, because it's, uh, you don't wanna laugh about this.
'cause this is a big question in terms of TA Maori,
that the, the view was that, uh, and,
and people who came outta the process said
that the previous provider won the process hands down
and the minister intervened. What's your response?
I can respond to that. And yes,
you did ask me this question last time.
I came in front of select committee, uh, I made
that decision and there's no way
that the minister was involved in that decision.
So you made a decision, Dave, that your decision was what,
to intervene on the process?
No, my, my, I signed off on the procurement, so it came
to me from the, um, procurement committee Yes.
To me to sign off.
I made that decision and the minister didn't in interfere
with my decision making
Process. So, so can
I just hear, can the committee just hear this?
Clearly, the previous provider won the process?
No, no, no. That's not, that's not what, what I'm saying.
What I got was a recommendation from, um,
procure from the procurement process.
Yes. And I signed that off based on the
recommendation I was given.
And at no time did the minister interfere with that. Right.
Did, did, so you, did the agency intervene on a process
that said the previous provider
was well ahead of everyone else?
If I could maybe, um, answer that one.
We ran a procurement process that was a two stage process.
The first stage of that process was, um,
a registration of interest.
And so we received a number of registrations of interest,
approximately 30 from across the country.
And then we shortlisted those registrations of interest
to take them through for an RFP, uh, request for proposal.
There was a panel that did the, uh, registration
of interest process, and they took through a number,
recommended a number of people go through providers
for the RFP stage, the RFP stage.
We then took the proposals and we evaluated those.
That was done by a panel of four people, myself included.
And that panel made a recommendation through
to the committee that Dave's talking about.
That panel agreed on the four commissioning agencies
that we now have in, uh,
delivering final audit commissioning services.
So that panel assessed all of the RFP material,
made a recommendation to the committee who endorsed it,
and then gave it to the secretary.
So at no point did the incumbent providers as they were at
that point, were they the recommended, um, uh, respondents.
Right, right. So you didn't overturn any decision.
No, they were never, the preferred respondents recommended
through at any stage of the process.
And the minister didn't intervene.
So you've clarified that. No. Okay. Move to Mike
Chair. Um, for,
for a period of time, I managed a couple
of NAV navigators and, um,
and obviously it, it was trying to, it was about trying to,
you know, meet aspirations
that really turned into crisis management
for most part of it.
And they were doing a really good job.
And, and, and one, one part of it was we had, um,
a navigator looking after, well, he, they would come out out
of prison, um, trying to get into housing,
which created a huge, big issue
because they were deemed as being housed, so
therefore couldn't access housing, which actually led them
to go back into previous situations
and then to go back into prison.
So there's so many learnings that came out
of the previous, um, model.
I just wanna know how we're taking those learnings, um,
from some of that crisis management work, um,
and moving that into the new, new model.
And also the fact that these navigators weren't actually
trained properly and they were having to respond to it
and doing, we're still doing a good job.
And how do we upskill, um, you know, navigators to ensure
that they actually meet the proper needs of farm.
Yeah. If I, um, just start, um, there, there are set, um,
five shifts that, that, um,
we have implemented as, as part of the new Wau water model.
The first is around reach
and ensuring through the navigator model we have reached.
Second is, um, using evidence. The third is data.
The fourth, and it relates to your question,
is workforce development.
And the last, uh, last is using that risk analysis
to be able to deliver hanau water, um,
where it needs to be delivered.
In terms of your question, um, how do we make sure that
that transfers, what has changed
are the commissioning agencies,
but the providers largely mainly remain the same.
They're the same providers that were there in the past.
They may not be, um, exactly the same in terms of, um,
um, providing to a commissioning agency,
but generally they're the same people.
The learning that you are talking about hasn't been lost
because we've suddenly got a whole lot of new providers.
They're the same people.
But in terms of workforce development, that is the next
shift that we are focusing on workforce development
and how we take a more structured approach
to developing the navigator.
That's why $125,000 out of the 150
per navigator, that's why it goes to the providers
and navigators to lift, uplift that workforce development.
Yeah, and probably just on that too, one of the, um,
one of the bits of feedback we had from 1.0 was that, uh,
the navigators are the ones
who are doing the heavy lifting in the model,
and yet they are often, um, not so well remunerated,
um, or have access to training.
Um, but importantly as well, don't have job security.
And so one of the key things we sought
through this procurement process was to give, uh,
greater certainty around contract length.
And so the contracts we've entered into are, um,
a six plus three plus three model, which means potentially
for 12 years, which enables the commissioning agencies
through the providers to then employ
navigators on permanent, um, employment contracts,
allow them greater access to career development
and professional development,
and bring in a workforce development plan that could be, um,
implemented over years.
I mean, workforce development is something
that does need a long term strategy to it.
And so having that certainty is, is really important.
Mm-hmm. And just coming back to the first part
of your question about the prisoner being released, one
of the, uh, key characteristics of wana order is that,
you know, people often have, um,
complex needs across a number of different,
uh, aspects of their lives.
And what's really important is to have someone working with
that whanau, um, around, um,
how those get prioritized
and how those various, um, issues are addressed
as a collective as opposed to
some individual socioeconomic issues that have
to be addressed, whether like employment or housing or,
or whatever health issues.
Because the, uh, interrelationship
between issues people face is, is well evidenced.
And having someone work, um, not necessarily just
with the individual, but actually with the collective au
around how to address those issues is a key characteristic
that we've taken through into au with a 2.0.
Just one quick follow up, 'cause you mentioned it.
So I did notice, um, uh, as a contract provider, you know,
we, we paid our Navigate certain amount
and then not other contract providers that were paying them
their ones less.
Um, well that all be sorted, so
therefore there's a, I guess a baseline. So that way,
Um, we, we don't prescribe
how much exactly the navigator gets paid
because that is an employment agreement
between the service provider and the navigator themselves.
But we've put out a funding model, um,
and the expectations around
where navigator salaries should be paid in line
with other roles which are commensurate.
Um, what is really important for us is that we are getting,
um, navigators that have the skills
and the attributes being recognized,
because often these are people who are very skilled at
what they do, but may not have the qualifications
or may not have had the, um, official recognition of
what it is that they bring to the job.
So while we haven't been prescriptive on exactly
what they are paid, we've put that into the funding model as
to that money being available to the service provider
to employ people and to bring them, um, up to, um,
a higher level of pay based on recognition of
what they're bringing into the role.
I wonder if I could just add,
Um, to sort of round this out with respect to the,
you know, what we learned from the delivery
and the implementation
and support for navigators is that, um,
our work over the coming, um, what six months, uh, will be
to build a,
and Grace has touched on it, a workforce, um, strategy,
which, um, the commissioning agencies will be the four
commissioning agencies will be quite important
to input into, um,
because they have to, um, create their own workforce plans.
And then those workforce plans will inform a broader
workforce strategy, which we intend
to implement from 1st of July next year.
Um, part of that will be to ensure,
as Grace has touched on consistency in terms of training
and development opportunities could be qualifications.
There are already existing qualifications available
for navigators, but we'll be looking to do some review
around those, um, just to make sure that overall we know
that if we're investing in the front line in a consistent
way, we can build that workforce.
'cause they're such an important part of, you know, creating
and supporting change for whanau.
So I just wanted to round that out in terms of
how does implementation
and delivery inform, uh, policy work going forward.
Good luck. I'll just, one last one.
So one of the things I heard sod be good
to know if it's true, is that the new model will basically
drive exactly where the navigators can go instead
of actually going to where the people are.
They, it will actually tell them they have to go
to this area and only this area.
Yeah, I can talk to that.
So, um, as I said earlier about bundle 1.0,
if I can call it that, the allocation,
there wasn't an allocation model
that was clear and transparent.
So we got a number of queries from, um, yeah,
organizations a across the saying, or Can we get some money?
We need more navigators here and here.
And, um, there was no clear mechanism for making sure
that the distribution
of the funding was going to where it was needed.
So one of the changes with Wawa 2.0 is that we,
we took the navigator model, um, of the, the FTE
as being the baseline.
Yep. Um, and then we extrapolated that out
for the funding available, which is 700.
So we've got funding for 700 navigators across the country.
We then took those 700 navigators
and have allocated them across the four regions based on the
deprivation index.
So the deprivation index, which, um,
identifies those communities of highest deprivation, um,
particularly for communities eight to nine and 10.
We took that allocation
and then we overlaid that with our navigator numbers.
What that means is that the four
regions each have an allocation
of navigators based on the deprivation data.
Now we have
provided to the commissioning agencies what the, um,
SA two level of that is.
So within region one, for example, you can see
that there are communities which, um, have high deprivation.
We haven't been, um, prescriptive
to the commissioning agencies to say,
you must put a navigator in that community,
or you must put it here.
So for example, in region one, they've got an allocation
of 301 navigators.
So 40% of all the navigators have gone into region one.
And that's because those region one has the highest portion
of our deprivation, eight, nine, and 10 communities.
It is up to region one middle to allocate
where those navigators go.
Now, that is, um, done in consultation
with their investment board, which is an, a board made up
of community members who make the decisions about
where the resources are best applied.
And this is because one of the, um, aspects
of barn order 2.0 is to remove,
remove Wellington from the decision making
to put the decision making back into the community
to make sure that the community is in control of
where those resources get allocated.
So we, we give the overarching allocation,
here's your 301 navigators
and the associated funding for that.
It's now over to you as to
how in the community those are applied.
Okay. Yeah. Two quick supplementaries or one quick.
Um, I noticed that the course collective, um, is one
of the new commissioners
or people commissioning groups commissioning au order,
and there's a focus on our Pacifica people
and it's, um, it's, it's run by some really
good quality labor party people, um, who are my friends.
So that focus on Pacifica, how is that going?
Willie might have, how is that focus going on?
Um, I know it's been a short time,
but in terms of having that Pacifica people focus, um,
how would you say that's going so far?
I might just start off and then I might get Martin Mary
to come up, but, um, the cause collective,
it's actually the Tarau collective,
which is, uh, another body.
But, um, uh, one of the
design features when we went into AU 2.0 is, um,
we, and this is a position our minister was very clear on,
is wanting to ensure that those, uh, Pacific methodologies
of reaching communities, um, who, um, you know,
don't have the, the level of trust that,
that maybe other communities have, um,
was a really important feature.
So we need to make sure that our Pacific communities were
still, uh, well served.
So, um, we do have in region four
with the ASHA Collective a, um, a,
a national service delivery approach to make sure
that those Pacifica methodologies come to the fore.
Um, we've been working really closely with ASHA Collectives,
um, ever since they were, um, identified
as the preferred respondent back in March.
And we've been really pleased with, um, uh, particularly
I think their, their focus on data.
They've got, um, a very, um,
a very high priority on making sure
that their data collection
and that their, um, IDI capability, um, is fit for purpose.
Yeah. So, uh, that has been one aspect
that we've been really pleased about,
but I'll hand to Martin to talk about
how it's working in practice with the Pacifica community.
Um, first thing I'd like
to say is I'm absolutely in awe of the board.
It's an incredibly skilled board,
and they have another little difficulty
that's not necessarily added others.
And that is how do you spread across a national scene?
They've achieved that. The other thing
that they've done, I think, which is really, really good,
is they've decided on day one
to have one data set into one system.
So they've simplified that.
Somebody mentioned a question about providing capability.
Many of the navigators are absolutely magnificent people,
but that doesn't necessarily transmit into using
an iPhone 16.
So there's a heavy emphasis on technology
and provide a capability.
Tomorrow evening, tomorrow
and Thursday will be their third
128 navigator.
And members of providers capability work,
workforce development, uh, conference,
they're moving really, really quickly.
I can't say too much about their chair well known
and Ulu business, wall of Hamer and so forth.
The investment board covers the regions of the country,
Palmerston, north, Tim, Maru, Wellington, Hamilton,
Waco, and the deep south.
Obviously, in terms of the question around
where the navigator's placed, 88
of 120 navigators are in the north at Auckland.
And that's just really the spread.
And at a point in time, they'll start to use their data
to inform their decisions about where they put the money.
Very good. Does anybody has
any specific questions about that? If you answer,
Can I thank you for that?
Can I ask quick, um, last, last,
'cause Dave, um, you know, you're gonna be leaving us soon,
so I'm just curious, um, if you can let us,
when you spoke just some moments ago about Wana URA
and how you've always had the belief that this is, this is,
um, something special.
Mm-hmm. Uh, can you please, just
before you leave us, let us know what in particular, um,
about FAU order do you think is accept is, is distinctive?
And I know you talk about reaching
who government agencies can't reach,
but what else stands out to you
and can you share that with us?
Trust. Mm, trust is the
Fundamental, um, between people and yeah.
The trust of the community.
Uh, everybody sitting here in
is committed, almost missional to Maori development
and positive Maori outcomes.
But we are public servants.
We dress like this, and
it's important for us as public servants to be able to
step back, step up and say, who can do this better than us?
And often we'll find that it's a community,
generally it's the community
because they have the relationships,
they have the connections, and they are of the community.
That's not saying that public servants can't do that,
but public servants are exactly that.
Public servants where these are community leaders,
and so they have the confidence of the community
and they're able to go where we can't go.
Part of that's because the state has a
number of responsibilities.
Some of that is around delivery of services,
but some of that is around coercion.
We find people, we as,
as part of our law
and order function, we put people in prison.
And for the average community member,
they won't necessarily see the difference between Ty
or the police, TY or MSD Ty
or health agencies.
And so being able to just provide a degree of separation
between what we are trying to deliver
and the community that needs those services,
those are the services that they need
and deserve being able to let go
and say, there's probably somebody else that's better
positioned to do this,
and it will be of, they will be of the community.
So I think the fundamental point here is that trust.
Why did, weren't we able
to vaccinate those communities during COVID?
Why was that? God knows we tried
as a public service, but why was that?
Fundamentally, it's
because we hadn't from the outset, used the community
to engage with the community
to lift those vaccination rates.
And when we did, they were lifted. Mm-hmm.
They went from 69 to 90%. Thank
This was a primary, but actually sits probably more
as a sub to, uh, so go back to some
of your more introductory remarks around order,
and you said, uh, you were remarking about how the, um, the,
the resources allocated to ANA order haven't changed
during your time there.
And you said, um, something to the effect of if it works,
then fund it, then fund me.
And you were, it was in the context
of you talking about the, the power of, um, the IDI.
Can you speak more to that?
Well, um, it's no, um, it won't be a surprise
that this government's approach to service delivery,
its flagship approach is the social investment approach.
Mm-hmm. And that's based on attribution
and being able to look at, you know,
when you're delivering these services,
how are you shifting the dial in terms of outcomes?
And you can only do that with data. Mm. Right.
Across the public service.
And, you know, we've been guilty of that as well,
and we instinctively know something
works, but we could be wrong.
We don't have, up until this point,
we haven't had a system in place where we could say,
we are going to do that.
We are going to measure the outcomes through an IDI system
and not just IDI.
There'll be other data as well
and insights that will come from the community,
in this case, the providers
and the navigators through the investment committees,
and also the commissioning agencies that we can prove it.
Once you can prove it, then
that sort certainly would strengthen my arm
or my successes arm to say, well,
now you should be funding it.
Mm. Awesome. Where particularly if you can't prove it Yeah.
In the places where you are funding it. Mm.
We spend a lot of money on delivery of services. Mm.
My argument, well, my, you know, I would argue
that in the future when I can demonstrate success
through attribution Yeah.
Would strengthen the arm, my arm to be able
to say, well fund it.
Hmm. Yeah. Which I've had difficulty doing. Maybe
If I could just add to that through Dave.
Um, it does feel a bit of a, a, you know,
violent agreement about the strength of ANA order
and the effectiveness of ANA order.
And, you know, as Mr.
Jackson's pointed out, there's been lots of audits
that have, um, time
and time again said, you know, whanau order works,
but we haven't had that, uh,
independent data collection at an individual level
that can say, actually these are the people we are reaching
and this is what, um, what is happening.
What we have done with 2.0 is all four commissioning
agencies now have data sharing agreements with stats nz.
So those all signed by the 30th of September.
That means that the data from the 169 providers
and the, uh, 700 navigators is going into the IDI.
Mm. And we've got our first IDI drop
scheduled for the second week of January.
So we're on track to achieve that.
So, so just so clear.
So that'll be the first time that that data is, it's,
is part of the IDI set and,
And the national level for across all of,
and stat have said that this is our largest,
this is their largest ongoing at national data, um,
collection that they are doing.
Um, and so this is going to be,
it's gonna take some time obviously for that data to, uh,
provide the results and, um,
and we'll have the maturity of, um,
the evidence to build that case.
But compared to all the other social sector investment,
it is ahead of the curve.
Mm. And when we look about at the investment in,
people might think that, you know, 155 million is a lot
of money because it is,
but it's still just 0.2%
of the social services spend in New Zealand.
And if you think of it in that context, um, with
so much evidence and support for wana order in terms
of the model, and with so much, um,
that has changed in terms of strengthening it
with wana order, 2.0 0.2% doesn't really reflect
where we think whanau needs to be
And when, sorry, if I could just add, when you,
when you think about what we spend on social services,
the social investment agency has
provided advice that says we spend $8 million,
$8 billion, sorry, on commissioning, you know, to
to various, um, service providers, all of that $8 billion,
half of it goes to the most needy somewhere between 15
and 20% of the population.
Mm-hmm. When you align that with what we are talking about
with regards to the deprivation index, for example,
those are our people.
Mm-hmm. Those are in the community. Mm-hmm.
So half of our social spend gets spent on potentially just
15% of the population.
Why does it cost that much?
It's because we can't reach them.
It's because we have to go there multiple times.
It's because they don't want to engage
with us as public servants.
I'm counting on the fact they'll, they'll want
to engage with a navigator.
Yeah. And so the, so just one final question on that one.
So I agree with you completely so far, order is, I mean the,
the potential of it's massive align brilliantly with where,
um, things are heading in terms of social investment.
But just I'm clear, clear on two things.
One is that they, um, uh, that it's the, the,
uh, the inclusion of that data, uh,
from the 169 agencies into the IDI, that's the,
that's the big pivot that's been made around the,
your ability to be able to measure it so as to then be able
to say, fund it more.
That is the big data pivot. Yeah. Okay.
So Dave talked earlier about the five shifts. Yep.
So there are a number of pivots that came through
with WW 1 0 2 0.0,
but the big data is the IDI.
Yeah. Because there's an independence to that data as well.
Yeah. So, um, we know,
and, you know, we are guilty of this ourselves.
People, uh, undertake initiatives or deliver services
and then they do evaluations and so on.
But there's a little bit
of marking your own homework with that as well.
Yeah. Whereas actually putting it into the IDI,
which is an independent data set that can then be, um,
cross-referenced and compared means
that the government can make decisions about where
to invest most effectively
because, um, you're not trying to argue your corner
because the data will, will show where the impacts are.
Okay. And so, and given how crucial this pivot is
and, um, how, um, um, how, um,
significant it could be in terms of where it leads, um,
you've been working towards this pivot for several years.
Um, it it's really 18 months or
So. Okay. Right. Uh,
because the social investment approach
obviously is a flagship initiative with this government.
And so we administer,
Willis announced her social investment approach
and then obviously launched the social investment agency.
We have been tracking that very closely. Yeah.
And we've been working very closely
with a social investment agency about the, uh,
the characteristics
and the criteria as to
what good social investment looks like.
Yeah. I mean, minister Willis was very clear
that you can't just put a sticker on
it and call it social investment.
It actually has to have fundamental characteristics in order
to qualify as a social investment approach. Yeah.
The, the learnings from, um,
the original whanau water have occurred over, you know,
the decade plus that that's been around
and just that frustration Yeah.
About not being able to make progress, you know, that we,
we didn't start this process, um, then,
but it led into it just that, just that experience of, of,
um, never being able to win the argument,
which annoys me.
Um, and then there was a convergence 18 months ago
with social investment
and the Minister for Social Investment, making it clear
we are going to spend
where we can get evidence that it works.
Right. And then it was just a convergence
and we just ran with it.
Mm. Fantastic. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, Greg asked some of my questions,
but I've got another one.
Um, uh, so I just have took a quick look at the seven, uh,
outcomes for whanau order,
and I can see why they're difficult to measure
because they are extremely broad and, um, and difficult.
So my question really was, um, my first question was, uh,
they clearly have come through from the longstanding belief,
but is there any desire to change those
or are they, they set how they are and, um,
and the monitoring and outcome reporting will,
will fit with that?
Because generally when you decide outcomes,
you will figure out how you're gonna monitor
and deliver reporting against them.
But really that's that ship of sale.
So is there any move to kind of, uh, you know,
review them at any stage?
Mm-hmm. There isn't, um, there isn't any plan to,
to change those outcomes.
Um, but underneath those,
and I've probably got the terminology wrong, there are, um,
a cascading set of measurements that will come down
and that will be based on the, um,
investment committees in each of the regions.
But also, you know, what we are looking at right now
as well are the targets that the government has.
Mm-hmm. And those are in the outcomes agreements.
And then there can be specific things that you want on done
or measured based on, um, the specificities of
that actual community.
But ad if you wanna talk to that,
I guess what I'd add to that is that the
progression framework itself is something
that is self-identified
or self, um, measured by the whanau themselves.
And that is only one part of the data picture
that we're actually, uh, creating
with our new whanau water models.
So we'll have that, we'll have what their, what their, um,
aspirations are, but we'll also be able to integrate
and marry that up with
what we are seeing in the IDI about actual
trajectory of their outcomes.
So, so it's kind of like adding more
to the picture rather than in previous, um, versions
of funnel order, it's just progression.
Are they progressing Yes or no?
We'll be actually able to say they think they're progressing
and they agree that they're progressing along
their own aspirations.
But we can see in the evidence of the data,
the other outcomes and social security
and justice, et cetera, are also,
are also tracking in the right direction.
So I would say it's a more of a triangulation.
And Dave mentioned our monitoring approach around targets.
And I think one of the things that the new Hanau auto model
really offers, offers us is the ability
to show solutions that work.
So when we are monitoring agencies, for example,
around the targets, and we are seeing there is disparity,
no one's arguing with that.
But what we need to do is put something in the place
to say, what would we do?
What would we advocate for you to do instead?
And so we are building a, a story
and a strong narrative around how attribution, actually,
if you use a FAU centered approach,
your wau audit commissioning for example, is what you fill,
what we advocate to them to fill, fill that we want to,
to manage disparity.
It's a good challenge. A great challenge.
Yes, indeed. Um, just one, uh, follow up to that, just
with the final, uh, commissioning,
and I note the move from some regions, um,
I'm sure you'll be aware, uh, um, to, um,
perhaps collaborate
and deliver the social sector contract commissioning,
um, themselves.
Um, how would the whanau order, uh, approach and,
and the commissioning that that sits under, so for example,
$1.4 billion in social sector contract per annum, um, a move
to actually bring that into the region, which is fits
with your locally led government enabled, um, philosophy.
And, and so how would the w water, uh,
commission fit into that framework?
'cause it's a, it's a big shift.
Um, that's a good question.
Um, what I would say is, uh,
what I think they're talking about is fitting
that into the social investment approach.
Mm-hmm. If I'm right.
Um, so to do that, what I would say is, um, if I was
to give advice to them, for example,
'cause we only, we already own have our
four commissioning agencies.
We already have our providers 169 providers
and the navigators, there isn't any more poutier
coming in there to do that.
So if they were to look at the social investment approach
and look at it through a Maori lens, what this is,
is a Maori version of the social investment approach,
I would advise them to make sure they've got the data right
to make sure that they can do that.
Now everyone, when you talk to them about, they say,
oh yeah, we've got that, we do that, but we know
because we've had to do it that, um,
there's very few at scale.
This is the largest program at scale
that is putting data into the IDI.
So, so I would, I would say, look at that. Mm, okay.
And make your case. Mm-hmm.
That's a, another interesting challenge. Okay.
We'll move to Penny. Yeah.
And look, and, and it's actually saying this,
the localized commissioning, the examples that
you're familiar with, correct me if I'm wrong, they've come
to an end or coming to an end.
Yes. And will there be a review of, of
that particular local localized commissioning page 24
of the annual report of anyone interest?
Uh, so localized commissioning, so we had
what we call general commissioning,
and then we had a number of additional initiatives, um,
in part where general commissioning wasn't able
to potentially reach.
And so we then took on localized commissioning.
Um, with the new procurement.
One of the things we were doing was folding in the, um,
the lessons that we had learned
through both general commissioning,
but also localized commissioning
and a number of those other bespoke initiatives like as well
because, uh, the general commissioning should be able to,
through the DeVol model, reach into those communities.
So we shouldn't need to have general commun commissioning
and localized commissioning.
And so the, um, the decision, we put the advice up
to the minister around, um, the localized commissioning is
that in a way it undermines the commissioning model,
which is putting the decision making
back into the community.
And so, um, ESA is coming to an end.
And the reason for that is
because the new contracts do cover their entire country
and actually do have that model of funding,
which makes it transparent where the resources are going.
And, and, and is there gonna be any
sort of foursome review?
It's been going for a few years, why it was one
of those classic examples of community
that is consistently being ignored
or missed out, which is why we did the
localized commissioning there.
Sure. Uh, we want to know that there are lessons there,
but be very clear then that if that's the case in the shift,
that general commissioning should be able to cover that,
or we should be able to measure that
at the next year's annual review or whatever that might.
That's will there be a review?
Yeah, just to, just
to close the door on that chapter, if you will.
Let's, um,
there won't be a formal evaluation of
that initiative as such.
Um, but we are actively continuing to,
um, work with them together.
The lessons learned, we've had quite a long transition
period, and yet we're working really closely with them.
Um, so that when, um, over this last period,
so when they do finish in in February, all the lessons,
all the good things that are going,
'cause we appreciate particularly in it is a community
that has been underserved.
And we want to ensure that the, um, general commissioning,
um, can pack up with great
Will. Thank you.
So, um, order started with, um,
under national, uh, and,
and Ana talked about obviously with Maori party, um,
started under national,
but obviously start, started by by Maori party.
She talked about a $1 billion,
a $1 billion P tier.
So we are talking what, 15, 20 years? Um, when did we start?
2 14, 2 13.
That was like Eight, wasn't it,
Wasn't it? No, no. Over
10 years now. No, it's about two 12 years.
So that was 1 billion. Um, and, uh, and,
and so they, you know, came in, struggled along.
This fellow over here, the former minister doubled it.
Doubled it or tripled it.
So, so which was, which gave, gave us a chance.
That's what I'm saying, grace, when you talk about a 0.2%
of the, of the money that's been put out there, uh,
have he got any indications in terms of uh,
uh, increase in budget?
Because it doesn't matter who's doing it,
we know it's successful, right?
I think we all know it's successful.
But is there any indication, uh, that, um,
that the budget will be, be increased?
Because, uh, uh, what we do know is that we get changed at,
at the au order gets changed from the start, from the,
from the time we started to today,
we can go into whether it was the previous, uh, provider
or this, these providers, they know that a Maori way
of doing things is can, can get changed.
So what response have you got in terms, I mean,
I know the government's shut off,
but, you know, it's all tied up.
We all know that. But surely this,
this initiative shines out more than anything else.
We couldn't comment on future budget decisions.
And I know that that's not a helpful answer mm-hmm.
In terms of the question you're asking.
But if I just, if I just position that differently, um,
because we've, we have
made those five shifts and in particular around attribution.
'cause I acknowledge that it was originally a billion
dollar pitch.
Yeah. Why haven't we got it? Why haven't we got it now?
107, you know, um, 12 years later and it's 179 million. Yes.
Why is that? Well, I've put it to you.
That's because we've never been able to prove it. Yeah.
Yeah. We've never been able to prove attribution.
Now you and I can talk about instinctively we know
this works, but we've never been able to prove it.
That's never gonna win a budget discussion.
What did mainstream prove us? What's that proven us?
What's what? So, so, so the response to that is
what do we get, what do we get for all the other
Docs? And that was
my point at the beginning
where I said, you can't prove it either.
Mm-hmm. But this is positioning to, um,
this is positioning w Water to prove it.
Mm-hmm. Now, if that happens, I would
he say somewhat, hopefully,
but I think it's a fair, um, presumption
that the money would follow. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Can I, can I just follow up on that thing?
Thanks Mr. Chair. That when you say we don't prove it,
surely there's been enough outputs, Dave, in Grace in terms
of, um, what we've seen in the last few years,
the success stories in terms of Hanau
and the way lives have been changed with this, uh,
uh, with this coup.
But, but you, you've answered that question
and you know, as well as I do, um, that we haven't been able
to go beyond the funding we've got now after 12 years.
So what I'm, what I'm saying, if there's another way
to do this, I don't know what it is, but,
but the way that, that we've positioned this is to prove it
beyond doubt with data.
'cause people look at me and they'll say,
of course you're gonna say that, Dave.
Mm-hmm. Is there a, uh, uh, is there a danger that the,
um, see, see, my, my problem is I always,
I've always had a problem yet, uh, in terms of the funding
distribution and, and, and,
and the limited amounts of Pier that goes to Maori in terms
of targeted fund, uh, whanau Water has been a success.
Is there a, um, uh, is it, is it in danger in captured
by some of the mainstream agencies, Dave,
and saying, well, actually, if it's working well,
we'll just look after it.
Because there's a fear there amongst Maori sometimes that,
you know, we are so successful
and then all of a sudden we lose the Kopa.
But is there a, is there a, I mean,
'cause everybody's saying, you know,
the call is Whanau Water could work for everyone.
All of a sudden Maori use Maori lose control of the,
of the Whanau water strategy.
Well, if I look at the commissioning agencies
and who they are in terms of, let's say in the South Island
and up here, um, ran,
and the course collective, you know,
those are strong community leaders, Pacifica
and Maori leaders, I don't think that they're going
to be taken over by anybody in, in fact,
I think they're going to be the exemplars of how we do this.
Mm. I'm talking about,
I suppose if government start opening up the policy's not
A hypothetical sphere.
It's the, um,
I I guess there is, I mean, to your question there,
there's a risk there, but there's an
opportunity there as well.
Yeah. Because if, if whanau order is, you know,
our minister's aspiration is
to make whanau order a public service delivery
mechanism, ah, no.
If, um, if that is the, the aspiration
sitting alongside Dame Ana's vision of the billion dollars,
um, those two things together may mean, um,
that there does need to be a bit more of an opening up.
Um, I think that's a, a challenge we are ready for.
Um, and the shifts that we've brought about with Auta 2.0,
uh, position w well for the next iteration of growth.
Mm-hmm.
And so just final question. Thank you. Yeah.
Social, social investment strategy that's going on, Dave,
if I'm hearing you right, is are you saying that it has
to be coordinated with the whanau water approach?
It has to be, uh, almost, uh, in tandem or move at the,
because you know, we are talking about significant funding
going into that area, right?
Yeah. The, the way that it, um, the way that it's framed
for us is that we complement,
so the social investment approach.
So what we have done is we've looked at the key components
of social investment, um,
um, with the community.
So collective, collective, uh, collectivizing contracts,
community commissioning.
We've looked at that and,
and a, um, aligned whanau water with that,
which wasn't difficult to do
because if anything, um, they aligned to whanau water
and to give it whanau water the best opportunity in the
future to be able to grow.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
Right. Um, I think we've given a good hit
and I being Thank you.
Very accommodating. Quite rightfully so.
So I think there's some, uh, some learning,
some some success that we can bounce off
and also some encouragement on.
We, I think we all agree is, is
where the future should be in some, uh,
more investment, et cetera, that type of thing.
So let's move on to a,
a new primary opinion if we've got a new
Promise. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, involvement.
Involvement, sorry, of, I understand
that funding has come its end.
Does that mean that KOKI has ended its entire involvement in
any of the Maori housing, um, moving forward, uh,
with a view towards the next financial year?
Uh, and if so
or if not, um, I'm interested in whether
or not had done an assessment of work
that they were able to complete.
'cause there's some good stuff in the annual report here,
but the work that they were able
to complete a fulsome report to continue
to inform Maori housing outcomes moving forward.
Okay. Um, so to answer the first part of your question,
um, that was always intended to conclude, um, on the
30th of, um, June, um, this year.
And it has, um, in terms
of our involvement in housing, we still have Papa
and we still do repairs for housing.
Grace, you want to look
That? Yeah. So
the, um, Langa program is, um, you'll be aware,
um, a thousand um, homes, uh, for Maori, um, as well
as the number of repairs and infrastructure.
That was a program of work that was done with, um,
housing and urban development.
Um, s role, as Dave said, finished in June.
The work to deliver those homes still continues.
So Ministry for Housing
and Urban Development is still continuing
to monitor the successful delivery of those homes.
I think we've got about 700
of the thousand homes now delivered,
but there's still a number, um, underway.
But it was appropriate for 20 to transition out.
And so that occurred earlier this year.
Um, our role in housing in that instance really was to
identify and, and showcase an alternate model.
And so working with housing
and urban development, it was around partnering with our
community, uh, partnering with our four prototypes
to identify how housing could be delivered differently when
it's led by community who understand the needs of wau best.
So, um, we think that that was a successful initiative
in terms of highlighting what can be done at
paces and at scale.
Um, particularly involving
and Maori as well, which is often quite a tricky
aspect of the development.
Mm. Um, not withstanding, we do still have a role, um,
in the housing sector, both, um, at a policy level
and I'll pastor Paula in a minute to talk about that,
but also at a more practical level in terms
of our ongoing commitment to Papa,
Which we haven't, uh, stepped away from,
and also a number of our repairs initiatives as well.
Killed it.
Did you wanna just add to that or?
I was gonna add to the space you just finish up. Okay.
Um, so it's not too dissimilar
to the discussion we were having with AU Water
and alignment to broader, um, government strategy
in this case, um, with the Papa KAA
and taking our experience that we have had over many years
for, in relation to Papa Kaa,
we undertook a re some research, uh,
in 20 last year in 2024,
which looked at all the district planning, um,
requirements for Papa.
And as a result of that, we've been able to, um, propose
to the government a national environmental standard
for Papa kaa, which should make it easier for, so that will,
that will set a minimum standard for all councils in terms
of their planning around how they enable PYA to happen.
In some cases, there was about 30% of, um, district councils
that had no provisions for papa development.
So what this says is it sets a minimum standard, um,
and it says there'll be obviously provisions.
If there's better standards
that have already been agreed at a local level with Iwi
or Hapu, um, then those will still stand,
but at least there's a minimum standard that should make it,
uh, easier for whanau to be able to develop Papa kaa.
And it's kind of come, again, it's coming full, uh, circle
with experience in developing
and implementing Papa kaa, learning from whanau about
what worked and what didn't work,
and then being able to influence policy.
And that's on stream at the moment.
Does that policy work include the ongoing challenge of
access to capital through banks for on?
And so that's, that is the case
and it, um, there's a couple
of other things that are in there.
It's the proposed amendments that have happened, uh,
that are underway at the moment around Maori development of
Maori, um, and making it easier for people to be able
to develop their land.
Uh, coupled that with, um, the work that, uh,
we have been doing with tutoring
and MB in relation to access to capital,
and then the additional piece around Papa.
So all of that has come from the experiences
and insights that we've been able to gain
and we, we um, we put that under the umbrella
of economic growth and development
and it's, uh, those are part of, they form three
of the pillars which are part of Nui Maori, which are part
of the government's going for growth strategy.
Okay. So all over finished
For us. Yeah.
So the basis of was about by Maori,
for Maori finished all over? Well, no,
Because the prototypes are still
There. No, but, but
the program in terms of, you know, the
targeted Maori funding, the funding's being moved,
being moved down as, as you well know, um, when we came in
and said this, it was mu much more than
about, it was much more than papa.
In fact, that was the restrictive, uh, part of,
of the housing policy.
So the di the disappointment obviously is that there's,
you've got, you've got a, a, a, a change, Chris
and Dave, in terms of the, by Maori for Maori strategy,
we had all the Maori housing, uh, entities,
you just confirmed this for us, all gone all over and,
and the funding's been moved to the general
and just confirm that no,
The, the entities still exist. I mean, have
They got no money going to the,
Well, they still exist though,
and they're still, um, operating to, to, to and k
or, um, yes, yes.
Examples of that, they've, that's worked.
We all know that. But what I'm trying to say is
now they have to compete with general
and the general in the general strategy.
Right. There's not a, there's not a specific
targeted funding strategy for these Maori housing groups.
That's correct. Um, although I can't really speak for hud.
They might have a No, I
Can speak for HUD if you like.
They might have a,
'cause I'm quite aware, I'm, I'm quite
aware of the strategy.
How has that, you know,
'cause we put so much, we all put Penny and we all, myself
and we, we all work so hard
to target Maori housing providers.
Maori for Maori.
How, how much, how hard has it been for our housing
providers we know has done well.
But what about all the others? Where are the other Maori
housing providers right now?
Well, if I just stepped back
and the point that you are making is that, um, when we
stepped into Fa Oranga, and,
and you'll recall that was an e at an iwi, uh, chairs Hui.
Yeah. And essentially what Iwi chairs had said was
Ana, and, um, you
and I were there, uh, he had said, look,
we delivered during the COVID crisis
and we have another crisis now.
And it's housing. We have the land,
we have the workforce.
Give us the ability to deliver housing.
And that's where the prototypes were born.
And it was a, a proof of concept as well.
That is what it was. And that's why we called it prototypes.
'cause they were never just going to stay as prototypes.
And then through the fight ing
and firewood on the program, they demonstrated that way good
that, that they could, particularly for Maori land.
And this goes to the trust
and confidence that we have that I've spoken about.
'cause what they were able to do,
and if you take Willie Tahu, he was able
to pull together Maori landowners.
Now for a Maori land block, the average number
of owners is 111
and it's around 54 hectares,
um, per lamb block.
And then you've got multiple lamb blocks in his,
and he was able to bring together all of the tribes
for the first time since World War ii.
A public servant couldn't have done that.
'cause you'd have to have the trust
and confidence to be able to bring those land
landowners together under iwi chairs.
And notably, the Iwi chairs don't own that land.
That's whanau, that's whanau own that land
and was able to prove that one, they can pull together, um,
a, a, um, coalition of the willing that,
that I couldn't do two, they were able to pull
that together at scale.
And three, they were able to get the workforce to be able
to deliver those houses and they've done it.
So I think that was a real success.
It it, you know, we are probably, I'm probably wrong
to call them prototypes now,
because they're not, they're delivery mechanisms.
This was a proof of concept. I, I think that was a success.
And they're still delivering.
I, I take your point that the funding is no longer there
as it was previously
There. There's a lot
of fun with, they told em about $750 million
that has been transferred out of the Maori, um, side
of the Maori side of the pool.
So, um, you know, I just wanna congratulate you
for hanging in there, even though this government
is giving you nothing. Well done.
Well, the role now that I think we, we have
quite focused on is our strategic influence.
So we've learn from what works and,
and now in a, in a policy sense, we have to get going
and making sure that we can take that.
And you'll be looking at me going,
yeah, I've heard that all before.
But that actually that, uh,
that is our strategic influencing role, which goes to, um,
being able to create the space for, to be able
to have their own voice,
but also for us to do our work across the public service,
working with other agencies.
It goes to the monitoring and, um, mentoring part of,
you know, that that particular
and our new strategic intentions,
we've really gotta be able to exercise that. Well,
I wanna congratulate you.
I think you're doing a great job in terms of, you know,
because you do have to our people still,
but they're going now into competition
with mainstream providers.
Right. So that is very, very hard. Mm-hmm.
It's gonna be okay for the Willy Hors,
but others are missing out.
And we have to work on the policy,
changing the policy settings with our own colleagues.
Uh, hence you get to the secondary, uh,
sec secondary policy advice Yeah.
And be able to make those changes so that the main,
so being Maori is normalized as part of the mainstream.
Yeah.
Okay. We'll Move to Greg.
Um,
yeah, this probably pivots quite nicely, just keen to,
um, hear your reflections on, um
Mm-hmm. Um, obviously
it's a, a reasonably new rollout, uh,
experience, reflections on that challenges
and where you see it heading in the next 12 to 24 months.
Okay.
Just gathering my, uh, thought here.
Okay. Um, so we, we have spoken
to you about and, and why we think that is necessary.
There's been a fair amount of work that has gone into this
because it is something that, um,
and I read your report, your reflections were need to be,
needed to be made simpler.
Mm-hmm. Um, that's quite difficult to do,
um, because we have to get this right.
Mm-hmm. But there's been a fair amount of work
by the policy team in particular and rolling this out.
And that includes fitting it in with the work
that we're doing around amending the cabinet circular
around Treaty of Waitangi guidance, of aligning that
with the Crown Law Office advice on how to approach,
um, treaty of Waitangi issues from a legal perspective.
And understanding, um, the overarching
and implementing this as part
of their overarching policy project that DPMC runs.
So this is multifaceted.
Paula and them have gone out
and they have identified, um, around six
agencies that will act as pilots.
Mm-hmm. They have engaged with the policy project
to get this put in at the center.
Mm-hmm. They're working on that guidance.
They're running training, um,
and the dial is starting to shift.
So if I just hand over to Paul now
to talk about how that's going. Mm,
Thank you. Um,
so it was, it is in the annual report, uh,
the beginnings of, and
what we've done in the new strategic contentions is
really amplify it.
So there can be no, and,
and that's through our policy approach
and that we're applying it so that there can be no, um, uh,
we are quite clear if you are coming to us, uh, you know,
this is how we are going to work.
Um, it is a treaty, uh, it is a treaty based framework.
And anything that you talk to us about our, our, you know,
we'll be step stepping out by using to, um,
so if I think about what, what we've done over the course
of the last 18 months, um,
really started from the publication of the guidance.
And that was the guidance that we came
and talked to you about earlier in the year.
And what that meant is it's, it's a product
that people can go to and people can, um, and,
and people can read it
and then we can ask questions about that.
Um, there's, that guidance went through,
I think at the time we told you there's quite
a lot of quality assurance.
'cause how you speak to te in the context of policy, um,
is, you know, it has to land really well.
What we've learned, um, in our engagements with some
of the agencies is, and what we've sort of,
I guess shifting a little bit to,
is we called it a policy approach.
But you've gotta think about that.
The whole policy cycle is what we are trying to amplify.
So that's from setting a strategy, um, doing your ideas, um,
thinking about implementation, actually doing the delivery,
and then evaluating.
So if you think about it,
sits doesn't sit just in the strategy part.
It's, you know, whether you are improving regulation,
whether you are delivering or whether you are engaging
or whether you are setting policy to totally help
or applies to all of those different facets.
So we've learned that through some of the engagement
that we've had with the pilot agencies, that people say,
I'm not in the policy team
so I don't need to think about it.
Actually you do. 'cause it could influence the who, the way
that you engage, the way that you regulate and so forth.
So that's, that was quite critical in terms of the guidance.
Um, alongside to support the guidance,
which is now up online, we have, um, an a, uh,
we have an overview of, but we also have the link
of the video recording to the mask, um,
to the mask appearance
because we thought that there was some real
gems that came out of that.
And it was important that people could see that, um,
as a way of being able to, to talk that through,
um, the secretary.
Um, and then what came out of that was Dave, um,
as the secretary wrote to all the public service, um,
leaders of promoting the, the publication of the guidance,
but also, um, asking if people would like
to be involved in the piloting of the framework.
And we actually got some really good, um, pickup from, uh,
from agencies, which, um,
burn can talk a little bit about in terms of the piloting,
um, of the, of those with those agencies.
Dave's already touched on it a little bit,
but, you know, we have to think about this has,
this can't be a one hit wonder.
Um, we have to think about our system leadership
and who we partner with in that respect.
So we've partnered with DPMC,
DPMC are principally responsible for policy
and the profession of the policy.
So, uh, through their guidance, um, that we,
we've been working with them to embed to
and update some of the resources that they have, um,
available to all public servants.
So this isn't,
isn't just doing the Maori thing on the side actually
to give effect is a requirement under
the Public Sector Act.
We're all required to do that.
And there's some guidance that DPMC
through the policy project is supporting us with, uh,
supporting to embed that.
Um, and the other part is with
the Public Service Commission.
Uh, so they had, so we've developed some, uh, resources
and videos that they will have on, um, their website
as well linked to our website, linked to d DMC's website.
Again, 'cause they have such an important role in developing
public policy capability, um,
and how we, and how we operate.
So those are a couple of system leader pieces
that we've done in addition to, um, uh, in, in addition to,
we've had the Ministry of Regulation as a pilot agency, um,
which we've been able to, to work with.
But maybe I might give, if you might have, uh,
talk a little bit about the work we've done on
the, with the pilot agencies. Yeah.
Thank you. Um, Paula?
Um, yeah, look, it's been really important for us
to have relationships on the ground with a number
of agencies and, um,
and in particular to roll out a standardized type
of approach in terms of introducing
and then supporting them to be able
to implement the framework.
Um, essentially what we've, uh, uh, been able
to achieve off the back of both, um, Dave's letter out
to the public, uh, sector leaders, um,
and also direct engagement from various agencies is
to develop a, um, a work program whereby we engage,
uh, with, uh, agencies directly.
Um, to start off with, it's just informing them about, uh,
the framework at a very high level,
but also talking about how it is that we might support them
to both be upskilled in, in the framework itself
and then utilizing it in their day-to-day work.
Um, from there we've had usually, uh, a, a program of two,
uh, workshops that run very closely to each other
where we provide them with all of the base information.
And then the second one, we start to work with 'em around,
provide us some of the examples around where it is
that your current policy
or strategy work might need to be supported with, um,
stronger, uh, advice and guidance.
And that's where we actually get into the,
on the ground utilization of, uh,
of the framework, um, in action.
Um, today we've had four, um, key, um, organizations
or agencies involved in that.
That's include included corrections
and, uh, the Ministry of Justice
and the Minister of Ministry for Culture and Heritage.
And, um, and also in terms of both Ministry for Regulation
and other organizations, we've already got them queued ready
to, um, run workshops in the new year so
that we continue this program on.
Um, in, um, in 2026,
the idea is we start developing an 18 month implementation
program, which will support its rollout, uh, right across,
um, the public sector.
Mm-hmm. Awesome. I just, could I just add, um,
so David has touched on the cabinet circular.
So we've been commissioned to update the cabinet circular on
Treat Wang guidance.
Uh, we think that's a, a really important, um, way
of being able to, uh,
or a vehicle for the pub, uh, to be able to show what, um,
or how, how you bring all of these parts together, uh,
as part through the, through the cabinet manual.
So that will happen over the next six months.
And, and we are quite excited about that opportunity too.
'cause it's sort of, it's about how do you embed some
of this in the system.
Um, and it's a, and and, and enables public servants
and ministers to be able to, um, be consistent in the,
in the sort of approach that we, we go with.
Um, I just will add what's quite exciting is when you,
when uh, when we start to review, uh, people's papers,
agency's papers, uh, we were able to see some of coming
through, which has been really quite cool.
Yeah. Um, it's, you know, it's complex,
but actually it's also simple, you know, when we start
to see people saying we are engaging, um, with Iwi
as opposed to Maori
and being able to distinguish who they're engaging with
and how they're engaging, that kind of demonstrates to us
that people are starting to get how you apply
to. Thank you.
So that last, um, that last example,
Paul actually answers my next question. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you.
Okay. Um, I think we might move on to, uh, te
Broadcastings, um, in, in terms of, um,
first of all that strategy, Dave, you know,
how we've had the, the government strategy
and, uh, the ground strategy
and, um, strategy in terms of, uh, communities.
Can you just ask me first of all, how, how's that working?
Uh, are there, um, meetings with ministers, uh, is that a,
is that a strategy that's, that's con
that has continued over the last couple of years in terms
of the real strategy
and getting to the, uh, um, you know,
the million speakers in another 2040?
Yeah. That has continued.
Um, and obviously, um, led out by the policy team,
but also, um, stat entities.
So the minister is, is continues to engage
with the communities and those entities.
If I just stand over to, um, Paula
and NAIA first just to talk about how
that's going in terms of the strategy. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
Okay. So I might kick off, um, these three areas
that David, that Davis touched on,
which we're active in terms of the first is giving effect
to the partnership, which sets up the partnership that is
between the Crown and Iwi Maori through.
That's, you know, that's really important
and sometimes the partnership can kind of get lead,
it's not focused on,
but we've sort of taken a,
we have taken quite a deliberate approach
where the minister has worked with the co-chairs, um,
uh, to, um, progress the strategy forward
and the work going forward.
And, um, sorry, Paul, can I just say, sorry, sorry to um,
interrupt, but, so the partnership has not been threatened
because there are different policies in
terms of partnership, right?
The minister, I know that, so the minister's continued,
there's been no change in the partnership.
No, and actually what, what has, uh,
I I think probably it's got stronger good, uh,
because of the intentionality
of focusing on the partnership, respecting the roles
that the, that Wai has,
and that's representative, um, in, in the way
that it represents Ian and, uh, uh, alongside the Crown.
So the role
of supporting the partnership starts from ministers
and the co-chairs and sort of filters down through to
and out, certainly out to the wider public service, uh,
arrangements that we have.
So that's the first thing. The second thing is
with the policy work,
and maybe Nadia can touch on this in terms
of the specialist advisory group
that was stood up at the beginning of this year, um,
that's been a positive way of being able to take some
of the policy work forward in terms of,
and then there's the investment part
and particularly the important role
that the Maori language entities have in giving effect to,
um, giving, giving effect to the strategy.
But maybe if naia you might talk on the, the
Work that The group might,
Um, um, so the,
is the, um, framework under which the partnership sits, um,
and which drives, uh, um, language revitalization.
So, uh, last year, uh, we, um,
we established a specialist advisory group, um, to look into
how we might best, um, maximize our efforts within, um,
Maori language entities.
And we did that in partnership with, uh, what that,
uh, report came out with was then recommendations.
Um, but with the key,
the key recommendation really is the importance of, uh,
and understanding what, um, Maori means
and having a clear different definition of that.
Um, and from there, looking at how we can, uh,
strengthen the soft architecture, um, of te So,
uh, we have, we have, uh, updated the terms of reference
for, and we will be looking at, um, uh,
a reset of that after we have done some work with TE
and the entities on, um, looking at defining
and what that means and what that means in terms
of their contributions, um, towards that.
Um, we are having a series of,
we've had one on that at the moment.
We've also, um, commenced a refresh of the mahi Corona
and we are doing that in partnership with as well.
So we've got the frameworks in place.
We have that Maori broadcasting
strategy that we all worked on.
That's all in place is an under threat though, be given
that there is no funding that is, uh,
f Maori no funding last year.
Ministers said that there's, don't expect any new funding.
Uh, we've got, I think coming in tomorrow, I think Mr.
Chair and I want want to, um, uh, uh, look to the,
to the CEO about, about that.
Now there's a threat in terms of Iwi radio, losing 25%
of their base funding is the whole, is how does
that affect the overall strategy Now in terms of, uh,
in terms of going forward?
'cause everything's put in place, the minister's very,
very supportive, but we've got stations now
worried about closing up.
You know, I've had, uh, iwi station managers call me Maori.
Obviously I have those relationships still
as the spokesperson in those areas and, and former minister.
So I, I'm worried that we've got this
commitment from a minister, we've got the strategy in place,
we've got a Maori broadcasting strategy in place,
but the whole thing could crumble, couldn't it?
No, Why not? Come on notes.
So Maori media acknowledged Maori media plays an important
role in ization.
Yeah. Part particularly in the normalization of, of,
of the language and, uh, the emergence of digital platforms
that would become even, um, more, uh,
important, um, going forward.
Mm-hmm. The work that we are doing, uh, in response
to the recommendations around, uh, uh,
will inform work around modern media, uh, in terms of, uh,
your question around EV radio, that is a matter that di
are looking at, um, as part of their, um, statutory function
around, um, operational matters.
Sure. Uh, and,
but we've also, um, if you, if a look in our annual report,
uh, we've supported engagement with, um,
EV radio on looking at, uh, spectrum in, in terms of, um,
the quantity of spectrum, um, the duration
or length of licenses, as well as, uh, the
around National Maori radio service.
Uh, and, uh, that engagement's quite important.
Um, and that we will be doing some further work on, uh,
around the National Maori radio service, um, frequency.
So those are still, um, sitting
with the Minister for Maori development. I mean,
It's a tricky one, isn't it?
The committee talked before about the level of independence
that some of the Maori groups have, the agencies,
so you've got the ma Hmm.
And, uh, but you are sort of the central group
that will provide recommendations to, to them.
Um, and you're saying no, they won't be eff uh, effective?
No, not yet, but, uh, um, you, you know, the overall policy,
but you got, if you shut,
if stations starts shutting down you 21 stations,
surely the policy will, will, will, will be threatened.
And for ka Maori redundancies over there, you know, they,
they, they're particularly challenged.
Mm-hmm. What I can say is that we work with
Maori and, uh, we, we look at if there are any changes,
what those policy implications might be
Supplementary here, you know,
so, so we, we also talked about, um, um, the,
the bilingual side, Paula, and,
and that, you know, you know, through the years
that there was a bilingual, uh, type of strategy,
not real Maori is where are we with that?
Is that a, is that still something that,
um, is being pushed through?
I know, uh, uh, traversed it and to do and, and,
and, and we've brought different people into to
where, where are we with that? Is there a
So, so the Mahi Corona has the three audacious goals.
Yes. You know, and that's still, that's still in place.
There's one around, um, ensuring
that the language is part unique part of our identity.
And in terms of tracking against that goal,
we, we are well on track.
Um, the second goal around Ma Maori, um, having the ability
to speak basic Maori, that one's also looking like, well,
that's the main speaker goal.
Mm-hmm. Familiar speaker goal, um, that
you'll be familiar with.
And that one's looking like it's also on track.
That's about 150,000, uh, Maori speaking
as much English as Maori, um, by 2040.
That one there is not on track.
If so, uh, as minister have, uh,
shared ambition is to think about how can we ensure
that we have the Maori speaking to Maori, um,
generational transmission, uh, as well as, um,
ensuring that we have the conditions, uh, you know, in terms
of creating the conditions
of wider society should support the, um, increase in the use
of, uh, so that's still part of the mahi Corona
Is the minister working in collaboration
with the broadcasting minister in terms of, uh, a sort
of coordinated type strategy going forward.
Yeah. That's where it makes sense. Yeah.
Go to. And so just supplementary to, um, your Honor,
Bo Jackson's commentary, uh, during the, um,
the estimates reviews, um, professor Laia Higgins
and other ces, um, did comment to, uh,
the Honorable Jackson about
how under the former government they were, um,
operating on the smell of an oily rag, um,
because there wasn't any, um, increased funding.
And given that, um, one of your outcomes,
your focus area goals is supporting the growth of healthy
and vibrant today or Maori, um, and modernizing Maori media
and broadcast in the, um, the broadcasting sector,
I'm confident that it won't crum.
But can you, um, talk
to us more about the whole modernizing, um, aspect,
modernizing the sector?
Because I know that, um, what we've spoken about
before is that, um, traditionally it was radio and tv,
but now it's a lot of this.
Um, so just share with us part of that, that copa
with modernizing, um, the broadcasting sector.
Yeah. So, uh, that will be around, um, making a shift
to digital platforms potentially.
Um, and some of that work's already, um,
been under underway in terms of the, and what they're doing.
Um, and another part of that is also, um, that you have, uh,
the workforce as well.
Um, these,
but those big policy questions will be considered as part
of the policy work that we are doing in response to the, um,
the recommendations.
Um, and the first part is to, to be very clear about
and refreshing the, to mahi to aligned with that, um,
before we get into doing a further policy work around, um,
the, any legislative changes that might be needed in terms
of to the respond to the shift to digital platforms.
And if I could just add to that, um, on the, um,
crown entity Statu entity monitoring side
of the work we do at pun, um,
that same message is obviously ringing through
with the material
that you are receiving from the Crown entities as well.
And I know you are talking with,
uh, tomorrow as a committee.
So, you know, for instance to, in its submission, uh,
in response to the committee's question identifies, um, to,
to continue what Nadia has outlined there, it's areas
for investment, what the future looks like,
digital first distribution, impact measurement
and data capability, sector,
capability building exactly those same things.
So you can see that commonality coming through,
not just from us as the monitor,
but the actual operational delivery entities
themselves. That's
A good point. Thank you.
The challenge though is, sorry. Sure. Pardon.
Uh, the state of the Maori report released
by Toyota Fi has very interesting findings about the uptake
of much young people, but more depressingly the fact that
actual speakers, people like myself aren't speaking
to Maori in public.
Mm-hmm. And despite all of the environment you might be able
to create under, that's a
depressing statistic.
Mm-hmm. To say that when this world's supposed
to be the most connected it's ever been, uh, we are seeing
that pause or, or, or, or drop.
And I think, think we should all be concerned if the entire
house, despite all of its goals and its many arms, my here
and function aren't delivering right across
the spectrum of that state.
Sure. Can I just, um, so,
and could you just confirm for this member over here, uh,
how much money was, because she's quite right.
We didn't invest. Who's she into you?
So she said there was no money invested in terms
of Maori broadcasting.
Mm. It was, we didn't have
that investment in terms of total fitting.
We, we invested over a hundred million dollars, didn't we?
In the 40, 40 million in the 80, in the 2021 budget
and 42 million in the 2022 budget.
Could you just confirm that for that member over there, that
that was the investment in MA broadcasting who said
that there was no investment, 82 million.
She talking about total fit
Maori broadcasting got a hundred million dollars over the,
over the term when I was minister.
Just for your, just for your benefit, you wanna confirm that
I'd have to go back and
I'll show you the media release.
I'm not saying that it's in the annual report. Okay.
We're getting close to the end here.
I'll, I'll, I'll ask for any, uh,
last questions from, uh, from anybody.
Steve, welcome. Uh,
Just if I may, on the point of, it's now
11 years since
that legislation was put in place, 10, 11 years,
Seven years down in terms of that entity to,
Yeah. So the leg was done
about 10, 11 years ago
was the minister of
2016.
Yeah. Yeah. So, um, is there a, like there is
10 year we will be hitting a 10 year mark.
Is there a plan or there any work consideration?
Did it land right? Is it stressful
or what's an consideration?
So at the moment we're doing a refresh. Okay.
Um, and as part of that, we'll look at, um, when the next,
uh, 'cause the, the, the actual ma Maori is 2018,
it was, uh, released.
Yeah. And then MA 2019.
So we've, we're into it sort of six years.
So part of the refresh is to think about, uh, you know,
looking forward and when is it right to, to have a, um,
I guess a bit more of a first principles look at things.
Uh, just to remember first I'll be after.
Can I, can I ask you, Dave, when you, um,
'cause you are retiring next year, so we won't,
we won't get you next year for scrutiny, will we?
I actually don't retire until the week after that.
I think that, I think that was deliberate.
I just wanna ask you where we are, Dave,
because one of the, you one
of the great things you've done is always, uh, uh, gone out
to mainstream agencies to remain remind them
of their obligations to Mark.
Sure. That's one of the, I think, you know, whether it's
or national, Margaret,
you've always been consistent with that.
In your seven years you have, do you sense a change?
Do you sense a change in terms of mainstream agencies?
Um, uh, uh, you know, approach to funding
because it's all, 'cause
because TPK, let's be, we all know in the room
and TP K's funding is nothing what it was like, uh,
15, 20 years ago.
You know, because the whole responsibility changed in terms
of Maori affairs and TPK.
So you became the recommendation agency.
So we needed CEOs like yourself to go out
and go, right, I can't fund the Maori,
but you know, we need your funding.
Are you, are you hopeful?
Do you think, do, do you think there's a change
amongst the agencies, uh, uh, uh, Dave in terms of funding
targeted Maori, uh, uh, you know, initiatives?
Are you happy with where, where you're at
or where, where, where GPK is at in terms of that strategy?
If I, um, if I just unpack that, the
evidence and what we're seeing through our monitoring is
that, um, the outcomes for Maori are not improving.
So in answer to your question, um,
what what we continue to do is the same,
and I I'm talking about we as the whole
of the public service is to continue to do the same things
and expecting a different result.
However, what has happened, and we saw this
and you spoke about housing, what has happened is
that we've seen examples
and housing is, is an example of wau centered, locally led,
government enabled in the locally led
options that deliver for our people.
And wau is the same.
And now we have an opportunity, particularly
through whanau water,
but also through social investment
to really be clear about what's not working and why.
And that's a shift that's getting serious now
and saying, okay, we are gonna put our penny down on data
and to be able to prove it.
And where I see Maori, um,
position right now is to be the exemplar of that, whether
that's in housing, whether that's in wana water, whether
that's in other locally led initiatives.
That's where we are right now.
So, um, we are not seeing the change yet,
but we are right on the cusp, I think, of being able
to prove what we've all known, um, works.
But we've, we just haven't lined up the ducks
and now we've got them lined up.
Mm. So it's, um, really, I would say, um,
The, the future is going to be in our hands.
Steve, you get the rights, the last questions,
Is that right? Yeah,
it's quite specific. Got it.
It's about the, uh, PIC 180th commemoration.
Are you aware of that in next year,
Next January? Yes.
And, um, I wonder how much budget has been allocated
and whether there's been a change in that allocation.
Um, I can take that.
Um, that's, uh, covered under the five Hong funding, um,
which, um, as members can see is covered in the very last
page of the annual report, um, um, by way of, um,
the, the amounts that 20, uh, administered this year.
But, uh, in respect of your, um, specific question, uh, Mr.
Abel, uh, yes, we are providing funding, uh, for
that event next January.
And, um, there has been no change in the allocations there,
but, um, um,
I'm feeling there's something underpinning the
question. Yes. Um,
There seems to be a suggestion
that perhaps there's a commitment of around 130,000
and that's gone down to 50,000.
Okay. Um, well,
If I'm correct, there's a joint fund.
Mm-hmm. But there's, there's MCH mm-hmm.
And there's, there's a few other agencies involved on that.
Yeah. And, and, and I can categorically say that,
uh, 20 or rather our non-departmental funding was never
funding 150,000.
Um, so that I'm presuming, and I can go away and investigate
and come back to the committee, might be, as Mr.
Heney is suggesting, uh,
combined funding from several agencies.
Okay? Mm-hmm. Cool.
Useful to understand. Thank you very much.
Okay. I think we've had a really good morning
and, uh, now early afternoon.
So it's, uh, upon me to, uh, bring this, uh, hearing
to oppose and we're doing that.
Uh, I do want to acknowledge you, David, it's, is the leader
of, but also your, your great team that you've, uh,
not just brought along with you today,
but the whole organization
and the, the tasks, the mission that you have.
And I always reflect on the fact that this, uh,
particular subject matter select committee
and Maori affairs, we have, uh, uh, if not very similar,
the same goal of what your entity has in itself.
And I always look at the roles that we play
and how we can, uh, tag team, how we can work as a team to,
to increase better outcomes for, for Maori
and all that sort of stuff.
Uh, with that, uh, this, the scrutiny is, is yes, uh, a lot
to do with the year, uh, that has been in that,
but also there's been strategic forward
looking questions as well today.
And, uh, I, you know, with, with, uh, everything
that I've heard today, I'm feeling finally confident about
the organization and, uh, and what you guys are doing
and in the challenging environment that we're in itself.
So with that, I, I thank you all, uh, for everything
that you do, uh, for Maori, but also for New Zealand.
Obviously it's not detached from that.
And, uh, with that we'll draw the hearing to.